1990s
=====

.. image:: images/1990s.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: 90s artifacts at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame

1990s Overview
--------------
TBD

1990s Stats/Favorites
---------------------
*Section started*: 2 January 2023

*Section complete*: TBD

*Latest update*: 29 March 2025

*Total Albums*: TBD

*Top Artists*:

TBD

*Favorite album*:

TBD

*Favorite Song*:

TBD

1992
----

As I have mentioned multiple times, this project was done working backward from
the current day (in the 2020s) and I encounter major milestones in reverse. This
is the point where things become almost exclusively a retrospective discovery
process. Of the albums on my 1992 list, the only one I actually heard that year
was the one from **R.E.M.** and at the time I didn't like it nearly as much as
their 1980s work that I was already a big fan of. As for the remainder, I heard
the singles from the **Peter Gabriel** and **Sade** records but they made little
impact on me at the time. This list would be assembled slowly over the last
three plus decades.

This year was very much a part of the "80s hangover" when most of the popular
music was being made by the dominant artists of the prior decade, but we are
also seeing the first indications of what the 90s would be. It was becoming
clear that more stripped back, acoustic sounds were going to dominate and that
women would play a far larger role in rock music. Some of the albums on my list
feel like a blueprint for how to make rock music in the 90s. I think it would
have been an exciting time to be following the trends closely, but alas, I was
just a kid.

.. image:: images/image_forthcoming.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1992

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px"
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/5hbqdrOiTeHindDJVPUjHM?utm_source=generator&theme=0"
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay;
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"
  loading="lazy"></iframe>

- *Little Earthquakes* by **Tori Amos** - [**1992 FAVORITE**] - There is a lot
  of discussion and disagreement about the artistic value of the body of work by
  Myra Ellen [Tori] Amos, but few will try to say that this is anything less
  than one of the greatest debut records ever made. This is the kind of album
  that someone makes when they have been bursting with ideas since they were a
  child, but only had the opportunity to put them to record properly at the age
  of 28. Listening today, the most striking thing might be a kind of 70s/80s
  singer-songwriter vibe on tracks like "Leather", "China" and especially "Tear
  in Your Hand" that we would never really hear from her again. Then there is
  the blueprint for the kind of brilliant chamber pop that she has continued to
  make on an off for decades since ("Crucify", "Girl", "Silent All These Years",
  "Mother"). We also see the first indications of the aggressive art-rock of her
  mid-career in the outstanding "Precious Things". Of course, there is also one
  of the greatest songs of all time in the timeless classic "Winter". [*Memory*:
  It is impossible to pick just one memory to associate with this record, so I
  will try to keep it to a few short paragraphs. In 1993 I became a massive fan
  of the solo work of **Paul McCartney**. Around this time, I recorded a
  documentary about his career of of VH1. It was a BBC program with different
  timing from American cable TV, and they needed to show videos to fill out the
  last half hour slot. They played the video to "Silent All These Years". I
  remember being confused and fascinated by the video with the red haired woman
  spinning in a box in the white room. I remember thinking it was the latest
  **Cyndi Lauper** song (LOL!).  I filed away the name Tori Amos, but didn't dig
  any further at the time. This would be the second of her records that I would
  pickup in the summer of 1998. It would nearly instantly become one of my
  all-time favorites. I remember trying to introduce my male friends to the
  record, who thought I was crazy to be so excited to what they could only see
  as "Lilith Fair Material". I remember burning a CD of MP3 files that my
  brother borrowed and played in the machine shop at work. It was a bit
  embarrassing to have the song "Winter" associated with me in such a den of
  conventional masculinity. I don't know if any record makes me think more
  strongly of my transition into young adulthood. These tracks remind me of my
  first taste of real independence and the newfound opportunity to establish my
  own personal identity. My relationship with the Tori Amos catalog has always
  felt highly coupled with my rejection of the traditional definition of
  masculinity.]

- *Tactical Neural Implant* by **Front Line Assembly** - The only one of their
  early records that I really need at this point in my life. All the usual
  elements are here: danceable electro-industrial beats, half-growled vocals,
  and clips of classic science fiction films. For me, this is by far the most
  successful iteration of the formula, and it renders a half dozen other albums
  as redundant. [*Memory*: This reminds me of my first year living in State
  College, PA. I had a tiny little room in shared college housing with three
  other students who had transferred from the same Penn State satellite campus.
  I wasn't happy, and this record often fit well with my state of mind at the
  time.]

- *Us* by **Peter Gabriel** -  The last of his "classic period" records feels
  like it gets stronger and stronger as the years pass. Closer to its release
  this felt a bit too much like *So*. Over time its themes of loss and change
  give this depth that wasn't evident to me immediately. The best moments are
  the gentler songs like "Come Talk to Me", "Blood of Eden", and especially
  "Washing of the Water". Yes the singles "Steam" and "Digging in the Dirt" are
  highly derivative of the hits from the preceding record, but in retrospect
  they provide some nice textural variation to a record that should be
  celebrated mostly for its quieter tracks. [*Memory*: The videos for the
  singles on this album used the same kinds of stop motion tricks as those from
  the album *So*. As a result of this apparent artistic stagnation, I didn't
  give this album a proper listen until much later. I think a lot of people made
  this mistake at the time, and this never got its proper respect until the next
  century.]

- *Dry* by **PJ Harvey** - No one has mixed punk with the blues quite like Polly
  Jean. "Oh My Lover" is one of the most striking career openers of all time.
  One of the greatest rock vocalists arrives in full force on tracks like
  "Dress", "Sheela-Na-Gig", and the closer "Water". She would never make an
  album this straightforward again, and over a dozen records later it still
  feels absolutely essential. [*Memory*: It is interesting to realize that two
  of my favorite artists of all time released their debuts in the same year. It
  took me a while to make it to this record, as it was probably the very last
  one that I connected with. It would take over 20 years after release for me to
  really connect with the raw brilliance of this album.]

- *Generation Terrorists* by **Manic Street Preachers** - It is fascinating in
  retrospect how much this sounds like the contemporary hair metal. I can't see
  this as a work on the same level of what they would soon do, but heck if it
  isn't a fun, glammy affair. We also get a peak at the more substantial work to
  come with the classic "Motorcycle Emptiness". [*Memory*: perhaps the only
  reason I consider this a minor classic is the fact that "Motorcycle Emptiness"
  was one of the two songs (along with "A Design for Life") that introduced me
  to these guys during a Glastonbury highlight film on HDNet. Also, I am a
  sucker for well done glam metal.]

- *Your Arsenal* by **Morrissey** - The best work from his rockabilly era. The
  best tracks are the eccentric, highly stylized ones like: "Glamorous Glue",
  "Certain People I Know", and "I Know It's Gonna Happen Someday". The more
  straightforward rockers like "We Hate It When Our Friends Become Successful"
  and the closer "Tomorrow"have held up better than most of his work of this
  sort. Not among his very best records, but a very strong effort [*Memory*: I
  greatly regretted not buying this when the vinyl releases were made around
  2014. Everytime the man opens his mouth, the chance of later reissue series
  decreases immensely. I tracked down a somewhat overpriced used copy on Discogs
  in 2023.]

- *Broken* by **Nine Inch Nails** - The most angry record by one of the angriest
  artists ever. This kind of theatrics often sounds comical to me as a full
  grown adult, but as a young person this felt different. That said, it is still
  a fun listen, and an amazing production. Reznor has always been a master at
  mixing the aggressive industrial noise with quieter moments. He probably did
  that loud/quiet trick better here than on any other record. This is front
  loaded, but those first two tracks ("Wish", "Last") are glorious. [*Memory*:
  Throughout my adult life, sometimes even now when I am in a certain mood,
  there is nothing I want to do more than listen to this at high volume on
  headphones.]

- *Slanted and Enchanted* by **Pavement** - I used to think that there music
  became more refined as the years went by, but I now realize that it was mostly
  a trick of production. On their first LP, the recording is compressed and
  crunchy, sounding very much the early 90s indie classic it is. From a
  songwriting and performance perspective they are already very much on top of
  there very specific sound. There will never be another Pavement, and I will
  never get tired of this album. [*Memory*: "Trigger Cut" has always been a
  favorite of mine, and I was really excited to hear them play it during their
  appearance at the 2010 Pitchfork Music Festival.]

- *Automatic for the People* by **R.E.M.** - In the popular consciousness, this
  is their finest work. Filled with ballads and acoustic sounds, this is a far
  cry from their early punk influenced albums. The mellower tone does allow the
  songwriting to come to the forefront, and I think that is why the masses
  reacted to it so strongly. The best moments on this album are the quieter ones
  like "Nightswimming" and the massive hit "Everybody Hurts". It would be so
  easy to write this off as a sellout record, and I'm glad that the world has
  collectively decided to properly honor this as a classic record. [*Memory*: I
  was already a huge fan of the band when this came out. My sister (and probably
  everyone's sister) bought this back in the day, and listed to it repeatedly. I
  didn't appreciate it at the time, and largely ignored it until I was in my
  early 20s. I now fully understand and appreciate how it fits in with the
  brilliant catalog of one of my favorite bands.]
  
- *Down Colorful Hill* by **Red House Painters** - This is one of the most
  beautiful albums ever made. A lot is made out of the artist's life, and the
  sadness of their situation when this was made. I prefer to think of it as the
  story of someone realizing that they need to change, and taking the first
  steps towards a better place. I don't know that **Mark Kozelek** gets enough
  credit for these understated, folk rock epics like "Medicine Bottle" and
  "Down Colorful Hill". It is a triumph of structure and composition that music
  of this genre can produce 9-10 minute songs this compelling. [*Memory*: I
  became really interested in the early work of this artist in the 2006-08
  timeframe. This was a period of time when I was getting used to living on my
  own for the first time in my life. There was something in the sounds and words
  that really matched with how I felt in that point of my life. While I couldn't
  relate to the specific experiences, there was a general mood of isolation that
  felt very familiar.]

- *Love Deluxe* by **Sade** - The transition from 80s sophista-pop to 90s
  downtempo and trip-hop felt natural and highly effective. This album was a
  massive hit, where a group sensed the prevailing trends and capitalized on
  them to great effect. I still prefer the more varied textures of the first
  three records, but this is a very talented group of musicians taking their
  sound to a fruitful new place. [*Memory*: The cover of this album makes me
  think of Columbia House/BMG adds from the 90s. I feel like this was features
  as one of the 10 albums you could get for a penny for most of the decade.]

- *Core* by **Stone Temple Pilots** - This was their most straightforward rock
  album, and perhaps the only time they were properly categorized as grunge.
  That said, there are also the first indications of those Beatlesesque
  melodies that would pop out more and more as the years went by. "Creep" and
  "Plush" were everywhere in the early 90s, and in retrospect, they are stunning
  examples of alt-rock tracks that were clearly aiming at the Billboard charts.
  I'm glad that revisionist history continues to raise the profile of this band
  that was underappreciated by critics in their time. [*Memory*: This reminds me
  of middle school. This was the official band of boys my age. While I wasn't
  really allowed to listen to this kind of thing, I was kind of into them to.]

- *99.9 F Degrees* by **Suzanne Vega** - One of the best records you were going
  to find in a used CD bin in the late 90s, this sold big, but was never really
  appreciated by most who gave it a listen. This is very different from the
  folk-pop she made in the previous decade, and added a lot of the sounds and
  color of the contemporary alternative rock scene. At times it almost makes me
  think of the twee (yet moody) alt-rock acts that would appear in the second
  half of the decade (e.g. **The Cardigans**). This has aged really well!
  [*Memory*: I remember a work colleague of mine who was also a big music person
  often brought in CDs to share. I think he brought this one from his wife's
  collection due to my massive interest in the work of **Tori Amos** and **Fiona
  Apple**. There is perhaps a bit of Fiona here, but in general this is also
  brilliant work by a female artist, working in a fairly different territory
  than my other favorites of the time.]

- *Nonesuch* by **XTC** - What a close to their original run! Their gradual
  progression from angular punks to highly refined art pop is one of the most
  compelling transformations in rock history. The songs here are absolutely
  masterful, especially the all time classics "Ballad of Peter Pumpkinhead" and
  "The Disappointed". This would have been an amazing end to their story, but we
  would get two more brilliant albums at the turn of the millennium. [*Memory*:
  For years this was one of those grail records for me. I used to assume that I
  would never own this on vinyl, but a 2020 reissue would make my XTC collection
  complete.]


1993
----

It was the start of my teenage years, and for the first time I remember really
engaging with pop music, albeit the pop music of years gone by. I also remember
connecting with two of the records below, which were both by legacy artists.
Those artists, **Billy Joel** and **Paul McCartney** would play a key role in my
developing musical tastes, so much so that I feel like those artists deserve
attention in my footnotes to the 90s as some sort of origin story. The rest of
these albums would be discovered in the decades to come, and I even vividly
remember hating singles off of three of them in the year of release! 

This is the conclusion of a period of transition between the 80s and the 90s,
and by the end of the year we were clearly in a new era. The grunge sound was
almost like a brief palette cleanser between the brighter, gaudier 80s and the
heart of the 1990s that would strive toward authenticity and diversity.

.. image:: images/image_forthcoming.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1993

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px"
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/6r95xO0X5kQiWs2YcAxPQC?utm_source=generator&theme=0"
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay;
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"
  loading="lazy"></iframe>

- *Modern LIfe is Rubbish* by **Blur** - This was back in the days when an
  artist's first album could be a limited success and they still get a second
  crack at it. Blur made the best of the opportunity. Gone is the poorly
  executed on shoegaze and jangle sounds, and their trademark quirky Britpop
  whimsey takes over to great effect. The start of a classic five album
  sequence. [*Memory*: When they did the Blur reissues in the 2012 timeframe, it
  made me really think about which of the albums were truly among my favorites.
  This was the first one I ran out and got. I remember being startled buy the
  price at nearly 30 dollars. If I only knew how high prices would go.]

- *The Buddha of Suburbia* by **David Bowie** - Sometimes albums become legendary
  mostly because of their obscurity. In the case of this one, it is because it
  is both obscure and amazing. This is the return of the "real Bowie" after the
  poor showings in the late 80s and the curious diversions of **Tin Machine**.
  It is the clear superior of the two records he would release this year. The
  soundtrack format seems like it has freed him to experiment with new jazz and
  electronic sounds. This is where 90s Bowie started to come into form.
  [*Memory*: I had known about this for years before I actually gave it a
  listen. It would be the rise of streaming that would allow me to experience
  what I had always heard described with glowing terms. Maybe not as amazing as
  it was billed in its days as an obscurity, but pretty close!]

- *White Tie, Black Noise* by **David Bowie** - A transitionary work that sounds
  like an artist who is trying to reinvent themselves, while trying to
  reconnect with their prior commercial success. The opening track "The Wedding"
  with its break-beats and electronic groove makes it clear this is a product of
  the 90s, and is followed by "You've Been Around", which sounds like it could
  have been left off *Never Let Me Down*. Lead single "Jump They Say" and the
  **Walker Brothers** cover "Night Flights" feel like the perfect fusion of 80s
  and 90s Bowie. Not as universally successful of the records to come, but a
  great return after almost a decade away from making good new music. [*Memory*:
  I remember VH1 playing the "Jump They Say" video over and over in the summer
  of '93. I really disliked the song at the time. I just wasn't ready for my
  favorite artist yet.]

- *Ultimate Alternative Wavers* by **Built to Spill** - They would later
  specialize in smooth, pop tinged indie rock, but their first, far rougher
  around the edges album will always be my favorite. Sounding a bit like a more
  psychedelic version of **Guided by Voices** or perhaps a punkier **Modest
  Mouse**, this is early 90s indie at its finest. [*Memory*: I had become
  interested in this band via their later work as heard on satellite radio in
  the mid-2000s. The only album I could find on eMusic was this early gem, and
  it was even more to my taste.]

- *August and Everything After* by **Counting Crows** - This will never be
  considered "cool" but it is a well put together and very enjoyable record. It
  probably sounds more like 1993 than any other album out there. "Mr. Jones" has
  perhaps worn out its welcome, but the slower moments like "Round Here",
  "Perfect Blue Buildings", and especially "Sullivan Street" have aged pretty
  darn well. [*Memory*: I saw these guys (with opener **Sixpence and None the
  Richer** no less) at Messiah College in 2003. It was ten years after their
  high water mark, and they already felt like a legacy act. It was a pretty
  great show that made me realize I liked these guys more that I tended to
  admit. This album was one of the last I added to the list, and it was one of
  the last that I realized I wanted on vinyl. It will never be "cool" to like
  this album, and I need to get over that.]

- *Everybody Else is Doing it, So Why Can't We?* by **The Cranberries** - I love
  the way this record sounds. It has the jangly, reverb heavy atmospherics of
  the great 4AD releases, stunningly beautiful vocal overdubs, and an
  unmistakably Irish soul that adds up to one of the finest productions of all
  time. The songs are very strong too, and this is one of the finest debuts of
  all time. [*Memory*: I wasn't ready for this when it came out. I remember
  making fun of the album when my sister listened to it back then, particularly
  the song "Linger". 30 years later I like few albums more.]

- *Into the Labyrinth* by **Dead Can Dance** - At times this one gets "gothy"
  to the point where it risks self-parody, but it manages to hold things
  together. At the close of their first decade they are dialing everything up to
  11 and we are seeing lots of the world music influences that infiltrated this
  kind of music in the mid-90s. After this they would head in a direction with
  far less of their early darkwave sound, and I wouldn't follow. [*Memory*: In
  the late 90s and early 2000s I was very into the band **Delerium** and sought
  out related acts that I found listed in an AllMusicGuide genre page. I bought
  a used CD of this album during one of my tours of Cleveland area CD Exchange
  locations in 2003. In the years ahead I would work backward into their 80s
  albums to find one of my favorite acts.]

- *Songs of Faith and Devotion* by **Depeche Mode** - I am one of the view
  people in the world who strongly prefers this follow-up to the classic
  **Violator** that preceded it. I think it is the stronger, more hard-edged
  electro-industrial edge on songs like "I Feel You" and "Rush" that make this
  the better record for me. Yet, we also still have the best elements of the
  synthop heavy, 80s **DM** on tracks particularly "Mercy in You". Of course, we
  also have an outstanding tender moment with Martin Gore on "One Caress". This
  is the peak of their 90s work for me. [*Memory*: I remember buying a CD of
  this at the Reading Boarders in the 1999-2000 time-frame. My parents were very
  concerned about the record based on the cover and title. I remember one of my
  sisters friends convincing them that it was wholesome, legacy act. In
  retrospect, my parents probably wouldn't have been OK with the content of this
  album. I am in debt to that person for helping me get access to this amazing
  record.]

- *Liberation* by **The Divine Comedy** - The official start for this guy, and a
  solid collection of chamber pop songs out of the gate. While there is a bit
  more filler here than what we would come to expect, the high points are among
  Neil Hannon's finest work, especially "Your Daddy's Car" and "Queen of the
  South". This would be the last time we would hear the comic new wave of tracks
  of "Europop" until 2019's *Office Politics*. [*Memory*: This was one of the
  albums by Hannon that I didn't fully appreciate until the vinyl reissues came
  out in 2020. I'm so glad I bought them all. They are all great records.]

- *Duran Duran (The Wedding Album)* by **Duran Duran** - The first of several
  times these guys have re-invented themselves and seemingly returned from the
  dead. In retrospect this isn't as significant of a change as it seemed. The
  opener "Too Much Information" is almost like a song from *Rio* with some
  accoustic guitar overdubs and crunchy 90s drums. The big hits, particularly
  the massive "Ordinary World" was a more significant diversion to a very 1990s
  kind of eclecticism, but still  **Duran Duran**. This is where they proved
  that they were true pop geniuses that would stand the test of time. [*Memory*:
  At the time, I was very disappointed by this album, particularly "Come Undone"
  which I despised seeing on MTV and VH1. I was already a huge fan of their 80s
  work, and this wasn't doing it for me. Somehow I didn't recognize that
  "Ordinary World", which I enjoyed quite a bit, was by them. In the late 90s,
  my sister gave me her copy of this and after reconsideration it became an
  all-time favorite of mine. This is the album that I want most on vinyl.]

- *Rid of Me* by **PJ Harvey** - The first signs of exactly how eclectic her
  career was going to be. There are elements of the bluesy punk rock we saw on
  *Dry*, but there are so many other things going on here, from chamber rock to
  screaming art-punk. This will never stop being a challenging, rewarding
  listen. [*Memory*: Very early in the vinyl revival (circa 2007) there was a
  teased reissue of this that never ended up being made. I remember asking Greg
  at City Lights to keep an eye out for me, and he halfheartedly tried to get a
  copy. We wouldn't see this re-issue arrive until the comprehensive repress
  campaign in 2017.]

- *River of Dreams* by **Billy Joel** - There is something to be said for
  knowing when to call it quits. This doesn't all work, but it is still a strong
  record from an artist who realized they didn't have another one in them. Of
  course, at the time of this writing 30+ years later, he is still touring this
  material and what came before. It is a fascinating decision for the artist to
  draw a line and say I am done creating. It is also interesting to realize that
  with songs like "No Man's Land" and "Shades of Grey", the artist is still
  trying to work out the New Wave sounds of the 1980s. The title track is
  without question an attempt to tap into the multicultural, eclecticism of the
  contemporary scene. A master imitator, the final work by William H Joel makes
  a strong case for his position as the Irving Berlin of the late 20th century.
  The fact that the last song "Famous Last Words" unambiguously establishes this
  as the capstone of his songwriting gives his career a kind of conceptual unity
  that even someone like **David Bowie** can't claim to. [*Memory*: I was a
  massive fan of his work around this time in my life. I remember my brother
  telling me that he had heard a new Billy Joel song playing when he was at the
  car wash, and I listened to the radio constantly until I heard it as well. I
  remember my cousin (also a big fan) delivering me a copy of the album
  unprompted on the day of release. In many ways, this was the moment when I
  fully engaged with the excitement of pop music. All my explorations from the
  **Beatles** to **King Crimson** to even **Nine Inch Nails** have in some way
  been branching outward from this release.]

- *Off the Ground* by **Paul McCartney** - This album is the best demonstration
  of the strengths and weaknesses of one of the all time greats. The lyrics and
  themes are often too obvious ("Looking for Changes") and sometimes downright
  hokey ("Biker Like an Icon"), but the melodies are consistently interesting
  and stunningly beautiful (pretty much the whole thing, but holy moly "Hope of
  Deliverance" is masterful). The sounds of comfortable middle age, Linda's
  illness and death would be the unfortunate perturbation towards more
  meaningful themes in the records to come. [*Memory*: This album was a big part
  of my summer of 1993. I have happy memories of listening to this (right after
  the hits compilation *All The Best* which was in the same CD clip) while I
  played Super Mario All-Stars on the SNES. I remember jamming the mildly
  psychedelic hidden track "Cosmically Conscious" on my sisters boombox through
  some old walkman headphones. I remember seeking out the CD single to finally
  hear the full version of that mysterious track. I remember writing an analysis
  of the cheesy lyrics to "Peace In the Neighborhood" in middle school English
  class. This isn't a perfect album, but there are so many larval elements of
  the kinds of music I would favor as my tastes developed. It took a while for
  me to aknowlege this in adulthood as one of my favorites, but there is no
  question this is a fundamental influence on my listening. In 2025 I imported a
  vinyl copy of this from Columbia, with full confidence there will never be a
  reissue. I have a deep relationship with this album that few people do.

- *Fumbling Towards Ecstasy* by **Sarah McLachlan** - The founder of Lilith Fair
  peaked here, and on some level, would never reach these heights
  again. A delightful combination of folk, rock guitars, and electronics, it
  manages to find the optimal place between smoothness and musical interest.
  "Possession" will always be among my very favorite songs. [*Memory*: It is
  hard to think of VH1 in the early 90s without thinking about the song
  "Possession" which was on there nearly non-stop.]

- *II (The Brown Album)* by **Orbital** - Along with *In Sides*, this is almost
  all I need from these guys, and perhaps the whole genre of techno. It is a
  case where the form was done so well, anything else just sounds not as good.
  There is something that feels so futuristic and positive about the whole
  record that also makes it quintessentially 1990s music. [*Memory*: It was hard
  to get their music in the US in the early 2000s. For a long time, all I had
  was a best of compilation that I found at a Cleveland area CD and Tape
  Exchange. It wasn't until I could import CDs using Amazon that I had access to
  all the albums.]

- *Vs.* by **Pearl Jam** - Their career has always had tension between polished
  professionalism and rawer, more garage influences under the surface. While
  their debut was dominated by the polish, this is where the rawness started to
  show though more. Some fantastic rockers here like "Go", "Animal", and
  "Blood", but there are also some gentler, more folky songs like "Daughter",
  "Dissident", and of course the legendary "Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in
  a Small Town". In many ways this is where they established the sound that
  would dominate their work for decades to come. [*Memory*: In 1994, the
  entirety of my middle school was ushered to the auditorium for an assembly.
  The state was mostly covered with black fabric, with the exception of a square
  projection screen, and mysterious electronic equipment was setup in the middle
  of the seating. When the lights were turned down, a laser drew a cartoon of a
  headbanging skateboarder while the sounds of "Go" blared in the auditorium.
  For some reason the school administration decided to treat us to a laser light
  show set to the hard rock tunes of the day. It was awesome!]

- *Red House Painters (I)* by **Red House Painters** - [**1993 FAVORITE**] - A
  lot has been written about the "beautiful sadness" captured in these songs,
  and it is absolutely true. It perhaps makes it more palatable to know that the
  artist is in a much better place now. That said, I don't know that anything
  captures quiet despair quite like the songs "Katy Song" or "Mother". The
  fuzzy, raw Albini like production really helps set the right mood. I have to
  be in the right mood for this, but when I am... [*Memory*: While writing about
  this record, I remembered a concert that I had forgot about. I saw Mark
  Kozelek play the 2010 Noise Pop Festival in San Francisco, and I was really
  upset that he played nothing from this record.]

- *Siamese Dream* by **Smashing Pumpkins** - Is this the most 90s record ever
  made? Those crunching guitars and ambiguously psychedelic production values
  certainly make a strong case. I prefer the meandering experimentation of their
  next album just a bit more, but "Today" might still be their absolute top
  song. [*Memory*: Talk about a record that takes me back to middle school. I
  wasn't even that into them, but you just couldn't avoid it. It was everywhere.
  Everyone talks about rock being dead now, but I feel like rock certainly
  hasn't dominated the popular consciousness again, since it did with this
  release.]

- *The London Suede* by **Suede** - The more glammy Britpop acts are the missing
  link between the 90s and the early 2000s indie sleaze era. Chief among them
  are **Pulp** and these guys. There albums have always sounded kind of the same
  to me, and this is all I need. "Metal Mickey" is an absolute highlight.
  [*Memory*: When I went to london for the first time in 2007 I went to an HMV
  with the express intent to buy music I couldn't get back home. I came home
  with the debut by **Howling Bells** and a singles compilation by this group. I
  can't imagine a more English record to come back with.]

- *The Early Years, Vol 2* by **Tom Waits** - I think it says something that the
  only album I like by this guy is a compilation of work before his first
  official release. I much prefer the straight ahead singer-songwriter material,
  and I like it here even more than the records, without all the polish and
  studio gloss. "Ol'55" is one of the greatest songs ever written, and this
  spare acoustic performance is the definitive one. [*Memory*: My girlfriend
  circa 2004 loaned me a stack of CDs. This was pretty much the only one I
  really like from the whole lot, and it has stuck with me for the last few
  decades, about 20 years longer than the relationship.]
  
1994 
----

In 1994 the local classic rock station that I frequented changed to a modern,
hard rock format. At first, I resisted the change and retreated into the CD
collections of my siblings. That station, WYSP, was also the broadcaster for my
beloved Philadelphia Eagles, and used the alternative rock of the station as
bumpers out to commercial breaks during games. Eventually I relented to the new
format and discovered a window to the music that my peers at school were
listening to. It was the last days of grunge, and a more diverse collection of
sounds were driving rock music. Some of the mid-90s hard rock that I was hearing
still makes my list of favorites below. Beyond rock music, there are quite a few
bits of 90s eclecticism on there as well. While I only knew about a quarter of
these albums in their year of release, this would be the peak of my pop music
awareness until my late teens.

Looking back, this was a particularly strong year for popular music. I think
this is where the positive eclecticism of the 90s really started to kick in, and
there was a wide range of sounds to listen to. 

.. image:: images/image_forthcoming.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1994

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/0WFhYr6bmlShgIZLjziYVM?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay;
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"
  loading="lazy"></iframe>
  
- *Under the Pink* by **Tori Amos** - Perhaps the most Tori Amos of the Tori
  Amos records. A completely unique, iconoclastic collection of highly personal,
  yet thematically ambiguous piano songs. The wide range of textures and moods
  makes for a record that never gets old, even after hundreds of plays. While
  the instrumentation and performances give a similar feel to her debut, the
  arrangements and song structure take things to a more experimental level that
  foreshadow the ambitious works to come. I think for much of the fan-base, this
  is "the record". While that isn't true for me, it certainly is a record I will
  keep coming back to. [*Memory*: This is another of those records that takes me
  back to my freshman year in college, listening on my portable cd player
  through a cassette adapter as I commuted in. There is a kind of excited,
  warmth to this album. The sounds of someone who has lived a somewhat sheltered
  life, and discovered the world a few years later than every one else. Or maybe
  that was just me.]

- *Parklife* by **Blur** - Every generation has a British band that is the most
  British of the British bands. In the 90s, that was these guys, and this is
  their most British album. I mean, there is a song based on the maritime
  weather conditions broadcast. A lot of Britpop, is more rock than pop, but
  this album really puts the pop to the forefront. [*Memory*: For many years I
  tried to convince myself that this was not the best Blur record. I was wrong,
  this is amazing.]

- *No Need to Argue* by **The Cranberries** - This is tremendously beautiful
  music. The grunge adjacent riffs and half-yodeled vocals of "Zombie" were the
  breakout hit, and most enduring moment, but I much prefer the subtle ballads.
  Much of the music has that 1980s 4AD sound, and the vocals of Dolores
  O'Riordan are peerless. Are they the best Irish band of all time? [*Memory*:
  For some reason it took a really long time for the label to satisfy the demand
  for a vinyl reissue of this one. They kept releasing small batches that would
  sell for over a hundred dollars on Discogs. I personally had two pre-orders go
  unsatisfied due to lack of stock. This one really highlighted the supply
  issues of the vinyl revival.]

- *Semantic Spaces* by **Delerium** - The huge pivot for Leeb/Fulber, what used
  to be an ambient, instrumental project now brought female guest vocalist to
  the fore. The formula was a massive success, and would continue for the next
  two decades (with perhaps too little variation to hold interest). There are
  still some fantastic instrumental tracks here, but the "pop songs" give the
  work sustained interest that the prior records lacked. "Tribal Industrial"
  music was all the rage in the mid-90s, but rarely would it sound this good.
  [*Memory*: During a 1999 trip to Niagara Falls, we were driving back from a
  fireworks display listening to modern rock station Edge 1002. The Canadian
  radio programming felt exotic and exciting. The evening program played a
  continuous mix of electronic sounds, almost all of which were unfamiliar to
  me. A sequence of two tracks particularly caught my interest. One of them
  turned out to be a new song by **Moby** (see 1999), but the other took a bit
  more work to sort out. I wrote a detailed E-mail to the station describing
  what I could remember. One word that I caught when the DJ did provide a list
  of the artists was **Delerium**. The helpful staff at Edge 102 pointed me to
  the Canadian electronic duo with that name as a potential lead. Thankfully
  they had a great website, that even included short realvideo samples of their latest
  work. It was there I found the song: "Flowers Become Screens" which would lead
  to what would become one of my favorite artists in the early 2000s, and who I
  still very much enjoy today.]

- *Promenade* by **The Divine Comedy** - [**1994 FAVORITE**]  - From a musical
  arrangement perspective, and perhaps also from a lyrical perspective, this is
  Neil Hannon's most ambitious work. There are also plenty of his trademark
  whimsey, especially on "A Drinking Song", and Irish pastoral beauty on tracks
  like "The Summerhouse". But, the main thrust of this album are heady, complex
  tunes like "When The Lights Go Out All Over Europe" and especially "Don't Look
  Down". [*Memory*: Around 2012, I became aware of Brooklyn indie iconoclasts
  **Zambri** who posted a cover of "Tonight We Fly" to their Soundcloud. It was
  now the Spotify era and I could immediately research and locate the original
  artist. That would lead me to this album and The Divine Comedy. Strangely, I
  would go no farther, and it would take several years for me to listen to any
  of the other tracks. It would then take a further few years for me to listen
  to another record by the artist. I'm not sure why I engaged so slowly, but
  eventually in 2017, I would have a new favorite artist.]

- *Bee Thousand** by *Guided By Voices* - Still their finest work. While the
  formula has varied little over their long career, it comes together here in a
  way that it never quite would again. Perfect little 1-2 minute pop songs, with
  just right amount of fuzz and distortion to give them a big punch. This is the
  kind of album that needs to be played loud to the edge of discomfort. That
  said, I don't know that this ever gets enough credit for how beautiful the
  melodies are as well.
  [*Memory*: I saw them play at the Pitchfork Music Festival in 2011. I remember
  losing my mind when the played "Gold Star for Robot Boy". While writing this I
  wondered if there was any video of their festival performance out there. On
  youtube I found a video of that song from a perspective that felt very
  familiar. What did I see in front of the camera? It was the back of my head,
  clearly losing my mind getting into the tunes.]

- *The Holy Bible* by **Manic Street Preachers** - Based on the lyrical content,
  the label didn't release this in the USA. So like most everyone over here, I
  didn't hear it until many years later. That is a shame, as it really has a
  surprisingly fresh, punk inspired sound that was contrary the prevailing
  trends of the day. British music was mostly an isolated, and independent scene
  from the alt rock that was happening on the other side of the Atlantic, and
  this album might be the most representative artifact of that era. It has been
  called the most negative album ever made, and the lyrics are mostly coming
  from a very dark place. Behind the gloom is a kind of rage that offers a way
  to a different place. This album contains the legendary runon song title:
  "Ifwhiteamericatoldthetruthforonedayit'sworldwouldfallapart", and it is a great
  song! [*Memory*: I became aware of these guys watching a Glastonbury annual
  retrospective on HDNet (a channel that played HDTV content in the early, novel
  days of the technology) in 2007. This mysterious record that hadn't yet had an
  official USA release was heralded as a cult classic, and my interest was
  piqued enough to import a copy.]

- *Vauxhall And I* by **Morrissey** - In retrospect, this feels like the last
  album of his classic period. We are still very much in the sphere of **The
  Smiths** with elements of anthemic Britpop sprinkled in. It is loaded with
  classic songs that still feature heavily in his live shows like *Now My Heart
  is Full* and frequent closer *Speedway*. The highlight for me are the tender
  moments like "Hold on to Your Friends" and "I am Hated for Loving" that have a
  kind of openness and sincerity that is rare in the Moz's catalog. [*Memory*:
  When I was very into WYSP modern rock radio, they were playing one song that
  was very different from the typical hard rock that comprised most of the
  playlist. It was "The More You Ignore Me, the Closer I Get". The whimsical
  crooning was confounding to my 14 brain, but it made a favorable impression.
  When Napster would become a thing several years later, it would be one of the
  first songs I sought out. It would take another eight years until 2008 when I
  bought his latest best of compilation. From there I would gradually become a
  scholar of the entire Morrissey catalog.]

- *The Downward Spiral* by **Nine Inch Nails** - I do really enjoy this album,
  but unlike almost everyone else in the world, it is not my favorite of
  Trent's. I prefer the slick synthpop that came before, and the prog epic that
  came after more than this heralded release. That said, there is a lot to like
  here, even if I find it hard to engage with something this angry as I settle
  into the contentment of middle age. The hits are great, but the filler..is
  filler, and this isn't one that I listen to in whole very often anymore. That
  said, every now and then, there is nothing that I need more than a listen to
  this. [*Memory*: When this came out, this "band" seemed to dark and aggressive
  to me. I saw all the kids in their NIN shirts at school, but I didn't listen
  to this album until many years later, and after I was a big fan of the albums
  that were release on either side of this one. Weirdly, this record makes me
  think about Circuit City. The electronics retailer sold CDs at a significant
  discount as a loss leader. I bought nearly the entire NIN catalog at the store
  in the late 90s early 2000s. This album was one of the last I bought at the
  State College location before it closed around 2009.]

- *MTV Unplugged in New York* by **Nirvana** - This will be the only release on
  my list by this legendary band. While I enjoy both *Nevermind* and *In Utero*,
  neither are a complete work in my opinion. The high points are amazing, but
  the low points are very mediocre. This is a wonderful, but kind of strange
  live recording. Very few of the hits are here, but many of the mellower tunes
  that didn't really work on the studio albums sound great here. There are a ton
  of covers, which are probably the better known cuts from the show: **Bowie**'s"The Man
  Who Sold The World", "Jesus Doesn't Want Me for a Sunbeam" by **The
  Vasilines**, and no less than 3(!) tracks from the **Meat Puppets** second
  record. This would serve as the exclamation point on a brief, but very notable
  career, and would drive interest in some pretty great music by other artists.
  [*Memory*: It is hard to remember a time when live albums could be mega hits,
  and spawn multiple tracks getting serious radio airplay. That said, that is
  how it was in the winter of 1994/95. This record was everywhere.]

- *Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain* by **Pavement** - This gets the reputation of the
  "mainstream" release by these guys, but I'm not sure that is quite right. This
  is much the same as what came immediately before and after, but for a brief
  moment that aligned with what was en vogue. In 1994 their was a tolerance for
  a wide range of sounds in mainstream rock, and this shambolic outfit reaped
  the benefits of that climate. "Cut Your Hair" is the song you will see used in
  TV promotions, but for me, "Rage Life" is the definitive statement. The track
  stands both musically and lyrically in opposition of the perceived prevalent
  trends of the contemporary rock world. Ironically, this song was released
  at a time when the prevailing trends mattered the least. [*Memory*: In general
  the headliners at the Pitchfork Music festival were disappointing, but 2010
  was a different story. And these guys closed out the festival on Sunday with a
  bang. I can still see Stephen Malkmus doing a high leg kick as they kicked
  into "Cut Your Hair".]

- *Vitology* by **Pearl Jam** - This album was released at the peak of the
  band's relevance to popular culture, and it delivered. The aggressive rockers
  like "Last Exit" and "Whipping"a re still there, but they are rapidly becoming
  more about the story ballads like "Nothingman" and "Better Man". No longer
  young punks, the Springsteen's of the 90s were born. [*Memory*: The release of
  this album was a huge event. I remember stories on the news about people
  lining up at stores at midnight on Tuesday for a copy. I remember being
  amazed that some folks were still buying a vinyl copy! Little did I know that
  I would return to the format 14 years later. I now too have a vinyl copy of
  Vitology.]

- *Dummy* by **Portishead** - A truly strange record. An especially atmospheric
  brand of trip-hop, with vocals by **Beth Gibbons** that sound like they were
  designed for use in a horror film. The kind of album to be listened to in a
  dark room with a glass of whiskey, neat. [*Memory*: It took me a long time to
  appreciate this. I loved the last Portishead record immediately, but it took
  me a bit to appreciate the more trip-hop heavy music on this classic.]

- *Monster* by *R.E.M.* - A shocking return to heavier rock sounds at release,
  it still stands as a noted left turn 20 years after. After several albums of
  quieter, roots rock inspired faire, "What'S the Frequency Kenneth" was a big
  jolt to the fanbase. At the time opinions were mixed, but this now is mostly
  universally accepted among their finest work. [*Memory*: This was a band that
  I was actually very into at the time. I was also a fan of their earlier punk
  inspired work, so the heavier sound was less of a shock to me.]

- *Superunknown* by **Soundgarden** - A lot has been said about the disjointed
  sensibilities of the metal inclined instrumentalists of the band and their 60s
  pop loving front man. This is the album where that tension is fully starting to
  show, and produce sonic gold like major hits "Spoonman" and "Black Hole Sun". The
  latter was everywhere in 1994, and for good reason. The mixture of grunge
  metal and psychedelia was a revelation. [*Memory*: I really liked these guys
  at the time. It took me many years to realize the parallels between this music
  and the latter day **Beatles** music I was obsessed with at the time. That
  said I never bought this CD in the 90s since it came from the "Metal" section
  of the Columbia House catalog, which was not going to fly in my family.]

- *Purple* by **Stone Temple Pilots** - In many ways, 1994 was when alternative
  music crossed into the mainstream, and there was no bigger example of that
  than "Interstate Love Song". Looking back, the track is a masterful example of
  an band dialing back their sound just enough to get on mainstream pop radio,
  while retaining their core essence. I have to wonder what some of the folks
  who bought the album based solely on that song though of the far heavier tunes
  like "Meatplow" and "Army Ants". I know what I think of them, they are
  probably my favorite work by these guys. [*Memory*: I like to think I have an
  usually objective ear, and this is one of those albums that gives me a bit of
  proof. Throughout the 90s and 00s there was a prevailing narrative that this
  band were poseurs and imitators of more authentic acts like **Pearl Jam**. I
  never saw it. I only saw an appealing combination of 90s hard rock and 60s
  psychedelia (that would be joined by garage rock and other influences later).
  The respect given to these guys really started to climb in the 2010s, and
  today I am far from the only person who gives them credit as one of the most
  interesting and enduring 90s alternative acts.]

- *Tortoise* by **Tortoise** - A lot is made about **Talk Talk** and **Slint**
  giving birth to the post-rock genre, but for me, this is where it really
  starts. There is something about the particular atmospherics here, with the
  jazzy, wide open soundscapes that define the early post-rock sound. Soon,
  other acts would dial up the intensity and create a crescendo heavy variant of
  the genre, but Tortoise's more leisurely approach still sounds great today.
  [*Memory*: I saw these guys play a now defunct Buffalo venue called Soundlab
  in the summer of 2010. It was a great show that made me appreciate the Math
  Rock elements of their sound that doesn't come across as strongly on their
  early records.]

1995
----

Even as a child, I felt pretty connected to the pop music of the day, and that
would intensify as teenager. That said, 1995 was probably the most out of step I
would ever be with the music that was being released. I was very much looking
back to the sounds of the 60s and 70s and could barely care about the hits of
the day. The year that I started high school, I was way more interested in
classic rock radio than I was the modern rock most of my peers were listening
to. I missed some classic records that I would only discover in retrospect,
including my favorites below.+

.. image:: images/1995.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1995

.. raw:: html
  
  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/4myE6q8uTfwCHWfrrRCfry?utm_source=generator&theme=0"
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" 
  allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>


- *Fun Trick Noisemaker* by **The Apples in Stereo** - I'm a much bigger fan of
  the latter day, **ELO** tinged incarnation of this band. I like the earlier
  garage pop version as well, but this is really the only record from that era
  that stands out for me. I feel like they had things right on this first
  record, and spent the next 5-6 trying to recreate that sound. I also feel like
  the amateur production values here suit the music better than the more
  elaborate productions that were to come. [*Memory*: When this got reissued on
  vinyl, it was the moment that I realized I would have the opportunity to own
  the large majority of my favorites on that format.]

- *The Great Escape* by **Blur** - The record where they fully embrace their
  jaunty, hyper-English side. What was hinted at on *Parklife* takes full form
  here. They must have been such a cheerful, brightly colored alternative to the
  other BritPop offerings of the day. It would all change again after this of
  course, but this will always be what they do best in my opinion. I like some
  of the latter day singles, but this is pretty much my off-ramp for this band.
  [*Memory*: These guys barely made a dent in the USA, and at this point, they
  were almost completely unknown. I can only imagine how much my Beatlemaniac
  self would have loved this at the time. There was no internet to know about
  this kind of thing back then!]

- *Outside* by **David Bowie** - Peak 90s Bowie, and the work of an artist who
  was still working very hard to innovate while capturing the spirit of the
  current age. This is "art installation music" and modernist in that very 1990s
  kind of way. This is the music of the early internet age. It is also still
  very much a **David Bowie** record, and a great one at that. I didn't really
  connect with this as much as his classic work back then, but not believe it to
  stand among his very finest work. [*Memory*: In the late 90s I was a huge
  Bowie fan, and I worked with another "music person" who only really liked this
  record of his. We listened to it a bunch back then at work, but I just didn't
  get it back then.]

- *Alien Lanes* by **Guided By Voices** - The second (and final) record from
  their peak era. A collection of perfect little lowfi pop gems, they would
  never quite capture this again. [*Memory*: Back in the early days of Pandora,
  it played "Game of Pricks" for me, and I was instantly hooked.]

- *To Bring You My Love* by **PJ Harvey** - An interesting era for Polly Jean.
  She dialed up the glam and amped up the rock, yet kept the essential character
  that made the first two records so interesting. Its odd that this was such a
  commercial breakthrough, but anything seemed possible in the mid-90s. As fast
  as these changes came, they would be gone and replaced with something else
  that was new and wonderful. [*Memory*: I never liked this one as much as what
  came before and after. When the vinyl reissue series happened in the 2020
  time frame, I thought long and hard about if I needed to add this one. I got
  them all, and wow I am glad that I did.]

- *Wowee Zowee* by **Pavement** - This is one of those times that I do not agree
  with the crowd. This is almost universally considered their masterpiece. I
  like it, but it is a little too long. There is a great single album here, but
  not everything needed to make the cut. I think the albums before an after are
  sharper statements, and have better focus in the playful and more series
  sounds that proceeded and followed this one. That said, It is a still another
  great record that I enjoy listening to, just not as much as those others.
  [*Memory*: There was a used copy of this that sat on the counter at City
  Lights records for years. I considered buying it, but never did. I never owned
  a physical copy of this until the circa 2010 vinyl reissues that Matador did.]

- *Different Class* by **Pulp** - I did't know about this music in the 90s, but
  if I did, I would have loved it. Like many American youth of the time, I was
  attracted to the brightness of English rock music that was a big contrast with
  the murky post-grunge of the day. This has those wonderful dance elements that
  you needed to look across the pond to find. It also has the high quality
  songwriting that blows away the knuckle-draggers that were dominating the
  radio in the US. [*Memory*: I became aware of these guys and this album when
  William Shatner's cover of "Common People" was making the rounds in the 2003
  time frame. What a strange point of entry, but regardless I'm glad I found my
  way.]

- *The Bends* by **Radiohead** - With how inventive of a guitarist Jonny
  Greenwood is, It is a real shame that this is their last album as a guitar
  based act. While the guitars would make their appearances in what came after,
  this is the last time they had a staring role. A tremendous rock album, and a
  milestone of the BritPop movement. "My Iron Lung" will always be one of their
  best songs. [*Memory*: For years I tried to claim this my favorite of their
  records. I think I was just making some passive resistance to the rise of
  electronic rock in the early 2000s.]

- *Ocean Beach* by **Red House Painters** - I always feel a little guilty that I
  don't like the music that Mike Kozelek made after he got his life together, as
  what he was doing in his darker moments. That said, this pleasant airy folk
  rock record holds up well to his earlier work. Maybe it is because there is
  just enough melancholy in tracks like "Summer Dress". [*Memory*: In 2009 I
  spent some time as a tourist in San Francisco after a business trip to the
  region. I decided to do a "Red House Painters Walking Tour" where I visited
  all the places he name checked in the albums/songs, including Ocean Beach.]

- *Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness* by **Smashing Pumpkins** - [**1995
  FAVORITE**] - There have been quite a few bands in history that for a brief
  moment in time, managed to completely transcend themselves and make music that
  seems completely beyond what they should be capable of. Smashing Pumpkins
  1995-97 may be the most extreme case of this. A period of stunning creativity
  and productivity, these three years alone make them legends. This album is so
  over the top and wonderful from the little piano ditty it starts with, to the
  lyrically preposterous yet incredible "Bullet With Butterfly Wings", and what
  feels like countless amazing and blistering rock tunes. People who say
  *Siamese Dream* is better than this are crazy. [*Memory*: It's hard to
  separate this from *The Aeroplane Flies High*, which collected the singles and
  B-sides that were released in their glorious era. I actually loved that
  first.]

1996
----

When I look at the below image, I can confidently say that I didn't hear any of
these records in the year of their release. I was very familiar with, and a fan
of many songs off of these albums, but none had found their way into my
collection. This is partly because I was very much in the peak of my backward
looking Beatlemania, and making my first explorations into growing favorites
like **Pink Floyd** and **David Bowie**. It was also because many of the new
artists I was interested in, seemed to conflict with the religious convictions
of my parents. It is strange to think about now, but back then artists like
**Soundgarden**, **Stone Temple Pilots**, and even **Jamiroquai** felt slightly
dangerous and out of step with the conservative values of my family.

Thinking about this selection today, this feels like a pivot year between the
rock heavy early 90s and the rise of pop in the latter half of the decade. There
are also quite a few indie classics there, including a few landmark albums that
would be very influential on the dominant music trends of the next decade
(**Belle and Sebastian**, **Stereolab**, **Olivia Tremor Control**,
**Tortoise**). Finally, Britpop is starting to reach full bloom with classics
from **Divine Comedy** and **Manic Street Preachers**, and an American band has
decided to join in (**Lilys**). If there a single dominant theme here, it is
without question garage rock. That influence can be heard in artists as diverse
as **Olivia Tremor Control**, **Pearl Jam**, **Lilys** and especially here in
the album by **Stone Temple Pilots**. Its really clear to see the roots of 2000s
indie in many of the albums listed here.

.. image:: images/1996.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1996

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/2pyhYKrUf1bRFtr1W0rDCz?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay;
  clipboard-write; 
  aencrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>

- *Boys for Pele* by **Tori Amos** - [**1996 FAVORITE**] - A remarkable record,
  produced by an artist who was experiencing a significant level of artistic
  freedom for the first time. While we have the first elements of the electronic
  music that would dominate the next few records, this is mostly still an
  acoustic, piano driven affair. The song structure and the fundamental
  structure of the album is quite different from anything that had really come
  before by any artist. The lyrics are more impenetrable than anything on her
  first two records, but they are evocative of multitude of emotions. I don't
  know that there is another album where I understand so poorly what the artist
  is singing about, but I know exactly what they mean. So many of my favorite
  songs of all time are on this album, and it is one that I will never tire of.
  [*Memory*: When I was in grad school, I met a woman studying in another
  program through a friend in her lab. We connected very deeply over this
  record, and the next three times our friend group met up at the bar, we spent
  the entire evening chatting. I'm pretty sure everyone else thought we were
  going to start dating. I might have even thought that for a brief moment, but
  we really both just really like that album, and the artist.]

- *Tidal* by **Fiona Apple** - This feels so conventional by the modern
  standards of the artist. The first album is definitely quite a bit more
  straightforward than what was to come, but no less interesting. The moody,
  singer-songwriter material on offer here is just as stunning today as it was
  back then. "Criminal" was the big hit back then, as much for its lolita-esque
  music video, as the song it was promoting. Most of the other material holds up
  much better today, especially "Shadowboxer" and the softer tracks like
  "Sullen Girl" and "Never is a Promise". [*Memory*: I got my copy of this album
  from my sister as a hand me down in the summer of 1998. She didn't connect
  with it beyond "Criminal". I was in the heights of my **Tori**-mania and this
  was a great fit for that time in my life. This album brings back vivid
  memories of driving my metallic purple 1997 Dodge Neon to the Penn
  State satellite campus I attended in Reading, PA. Many of those freshman
  mornings I would have this in the Sony Discman that was playing though a
  cassette deck adapter.]

- *If You're Feeling Sinister* by **Belle and Sebastian** - One of their best
  albums, but unlike most fans, I do not consider it to be their very best. This
  is a tremendous indie-folk record, but for me it isn't quite as effective as
  the more spare, unpolished EPs that came before, or the slicker poppier music
  that would come in the next decade. However, there are some great tracks here,
  especially "Like Dylan in the Movies" and "Seeing Other People". [*Memory*:
  These guys dominated my listening in the 2004-2006 time frame. This is the
  soundtrack to the end of my academic career and start of my first job.]

- *First Band on the Moon* by **The Cardigans** - "Lovefool" was a massive hit,
  and while a great song, it sells these guys a bit short. The kind of pop music
  that can only come from Scandinavia, this is sweet, but surprisingly moody
  music. It would get even darker from here on out, but there is a real chill to
  the atmospherics and songwriting on this record. [*Memory*: I was listening to
  this a lot in the Summer of 1999, and it reminds me very much of my first
  engineering internship. I would listen to CDs on my Windows NT machine that I
  used make CAD drawings. This was one of the discs that was on repeat.]

- *Casanova* by **Divine Comedy** - There are many of the typical elements here:
  the sense of humor, the chamber pop sensibility, the layered harmonies by the
  artist. However, this is the closest this guy has ever come to actually making
  Britpop. It is the eccentric kind of Britpop made by the likes of **Blur**,
  and it isn't quite all the way there, but if you squint, it is there. For many
  folks this is the best record, for me it is in the middle of a very strong
  pack of records. [*Memory*: This was the second album I tried from this guy
  after losing my mind listening to **Promenade** repeatedly for about 5 years.
  I remember wondering why I waited so long to dig deeper.]

- *Dance Hall at Louise Point* by **John Parish & PJ Harvey** - This is the
  first record in the quieter, artier sound that would become her predominant
  style in her more recent work. There still are some aggressive, abrasive
  moments here, but they unfold in a creeping, pensive way that is also very
  representative of the latter day Polly Jean. "Heela" is such a remarkable
  song, and will always be one of my favorites. Even though we would get a few
  more records in a more conventional rock style, this is the start of the PJ we
  know and love today. [*Memory*: When I was working my way through her catalog
  in the 2007 time frame, I bought a used CD copy of this for about a dollar and
  didn't know what to make of it. This took me a while to fully appreciate, but
  it is not one of my very favorites.]

- *Traveling Without Moving* by **Jamiroquai** - It is hard to think about this
  record without picturing that legendary video for "Virtual Insanity" and I'm
  sure I would never have heard this album without that amazing promo clip. That
  said, this is a funky, highly enjoyable affair that is more than a little
  derivative of **Stevie Wonder**. Much like the master it has patterned itself
  after, what we get here is a pleasant mix of funky upbeat tunes, and pretty
  soulful ballads. [*Memory*: This makes me think of a quant music "format" that
  I collected in the late 90s. CDs were expensive (and in some cases, evil in
  the religion I was raised in) and I couldn't always acquire the latest tunes I
  liked from TV or radio. The internet of the late 90s provided me an
  approximate solution, the MIDI file. I downloaded the minimalist, instrumental
  sequencer versions of popular tunes that I didn't have for real. I remember
  downloading a particularly impressive version of "Virtual Insanity" in the
  (new at the time) XG MIDI format. It didn't have the vocal track, but I could
  still enjoy that funky groove.]

- *Better Can't Make Your Life Better* by **Lilys** - I love **The Kinks** and
  so apparently does Kurt Heasley, the man behind **Lilys**. This feels like a
  love letter to the pre "Village Green" **Kinks** and it is expertly done. The
  90s were a time of significant interest in the sounds of the mid 60s, and this
  is a expert recreation and modernization of the garage rock sound. [*Memory*:
  There was a vinyl copy of this at one of my favorite Rochester shops (The Bop
  Shop) for probably about 5 years before I finally pulled the trigger and
  picked it up. Why was I delaying, this is wonderful stuff!]

- *Everything Must Go* by **Manic Street Preachers** - These guys were always
  one of the heavier BritPop acts, but this is where the balladry and pop
  sensibility started to really creep in. That said, it totally works. A really
  polished and literate set of tracks that never get old. The epic "Elvis
  Impersonator..." returns to one of their favorite topics, the relationships
  between the UK and America. Admittedly their frank consideration of that topic
  is why they never really made it over here, and why I didn't hear anything
  from them until the mid 2000s. I would have absolutely loved it back then, and
  I certainly do now! [*Memory*: "A Design for Life" is the ultimate BritPop
  anthem. It was made to be screamed along with by a Glastonbury festival crowd.
  I got a noise violation letter for jamming it too loud at in my State College
  apartment in 2007.]

- *Older* by **George Michael** - This album sold millions of copies, but not as
  many millions of the two prior, and therefore was perceived as a failure at
  the time. Today it sounds like a revelation. A sophisticated, mature affair
  with some of his best songwriting and vocal performances, this was not fully
  appreciated at release. "Jesus to a Child" is a remarkable song, perhaps his
  very finest. Everything has such a warm, atmospheric vibe. Maybe the best 90s
  sophista-pop record. [*Memory*: I certainly remember the singles from this
  record getting played (especially on VH1), and had them on a greatest hits
  compilation, but I didn't listen to the whole album until 2021. After reading
  a biography on the artist I streamed all the records and was blown away by
  this one.]

- *Who Can you Trust* by **Morcheeba** - The big breakout for these guys, and a
  wonderful evolution of trip-hop. The kind of smooth and elegant record that
  you could replay to infinity and not tire of. It is almost like
  **Portishead** has been polished up and made TV commercial ready, but somehow
  still very compelling. [*Memory*: Early in the 2020 pandemic year, I made an
  effort to listen through to albums I acquired in the CD era and had forgot
  about. I rediscovered this brilliant LP though that process.]

- *Dusk at Cubist Castle* by **The Olivia Tremor Control** - I like the pop
  songs on this record quite a bit, but the ambient, instrumental parts just
  don't work as well as the ones on the next (and final) record. No denying how
  influential everything about this would be on a whole generation of psych rock
  revivalists. [*Memory*: These guys always remind me of my move to Rochester,
  NY. I was very into them around that time, and they would also reissue all
  their records on vinyl around that time.]

- *In Sides* by **Orbital** - The definitive album oriented techno record. They
  always liked to work in longer forms, but this whole album is built around
  10-20 minute chunks of music. I'm always going back and forth between this and
  the brown album as my favorite, but without question "Out There Somewhere" is
  there absolute best moment. Techno in general hasn't aged well, but this still
  sounds amazing today. I really love the way they mix in real instruments with
  all the electronics here. It gives a texture that a lot of the electronic
  music of the day did  not have [*Memory*: One of my favorite things to play on
  a run, it is hard to not think about exercise when I hear this record.]

- *No Code* by **Pearl Jam** - This has always been my favorite of their albums,
  and I feel like the world has caught up with me. The stripped back garage
  mentality suits them well, and captures their live nature better than any of
  their other work. Short, hard-hitting songs that avoid the extended bombast
  that they sometimes tend to fall into. They also mix in one of their sweetest
  balads in "Off He Goes", and the greatest **Pearl Jam** song not sung by Eddie
  Vedder in "Mankind". [*Memory*: I bought a used copy of this at a secondhand
  store called Cash Converters around 1999. I payed a dollar for it, showing how
  unappreciated it was at the time. I later payed almost 40 bucks for the vinyl
  reissue, and many others were happy to do so as well.]

- *New Adventures in Hi-Fi* by **R.E.M.** - A clear attempt to return to a more
  arty, low-key sound after the straightforward rock of **Monster**. This was
  very under the radar at the time, but many people (including myself) learned
  to appreciate this over time. [*Memory*: I bought my CD copy of this record
  when I was working as a summer intern at NASA Glenn in the summer of 2023.
  There was a message board where you could post things for sale, and I bought
  this from someone along with **Hum**'s *You'd Prefer an Astronaut*.]

- *Down on the Upside* by **Soundgarden** - In my opinion, this is a highly
  underrated follow-up to their breakout hit *Superunknown*. A return to more
  conventional hard rock, with some elements of the singer-songwriter fare that
  would dominate the early **Chris Cornell** solo career. This would have been a
  great way for them to wrap up, except for the ill advised reunion in the
  2010s. [*Memory*: "Blow Up the Outside World" was one of the very first MP3s I
  downloaded from the internet. Weirdly I downloaded it from the FTP server
  ran by a fellow student who I didn't really care for at my high school. "Free"
  music conquers all barriers.]

- *Emperor Tomato Ketchup* by **Stereolab** - 90s indie was wildly diverse and
  often hard to categorize, and this might be the definitive album of the era.
  Electronic tinged rock music with a Krautrock groove and a pop soul, there is
  a little bit of everything here. This was the doorway to so many places for
  me: **Can**, **Kraftwerk**, **Bell and Sebastian**, **Of Montreal**, and who
  knows what else. [*Memory*: Maybe the most important record I sought out
  because of the AllMusicGuide genre summaries. They considered this an indie
  landmark, and that isn't putting it strongly enough.]

- *Tiny Music...* by **Stone Temple Pilots** - Much like *No Code* (above), I
  feel ahead of the times picking this record out as this band's finest hour.
  The combination of garage, psychedelia, and glam on offer here is a very
  unique and memorable sound from a group that was often dismissed as
  derivative. Here they sound very much ahead of the times, and almost sound a
  little prophetic of the indie rock that would dominate the turn of the
  millennium. [*Memory*: When I look at the cover of this record, I can't help
  but picture the Columbia House music club mailers and magazine adds that
  seemed to feature this album for the better part of 1996-97.]

- *Millions Now Living will Never Die* by **Tortoise** - This may be the
  definitive post rock record. A straight up fusion of punk and jazz, this sound
  has been attempted so many times, but very rarely this well. I sometimes
  wonder if these guys are why I grew up to like jazz (particularly
  electro-jazz) so much. [*Memory*: The name of this album has always fascinated
  me, since it is titled after the greatest lie ever told by the religion I was
  raised in. I wonder how that came to be?]

1997
----

I have mentioned this several times, but it is important to know that I worked
on this project starting in 2020 and moving backwards in time. As a result,
milestones were observed in reverse. When I look at the records below, I can see
the influence of three very big factors for the very first time. First, this was
the year that I would have my first jobs that would bring in money that I could
use to purchase albums of my own choosing. Second, I got my drivers license
which allowed me to transport myself to the mall or Best Buy/Circuit City where
I could personally select the music I was interested in. This means for the
first time there are quite a few records on the list that were something that I
purchased with my own money in the year of release.

The third big event was something the whole world was going through at the same
time, the Internet. We didn't yet have MP3s for music discovery, but static
webpages of dial-up and Web 1.0 were a wealth of information about the latest
activity and releases from my favorite artists. We had recently subscribed to
AOL at home, and it opened my eyes to a range of information about pop music and
a variety of other topics.

.. image:: images/1997.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1997

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/4gyDMP7YhOyQqP9bXYdLLv?utm_source=generator" 
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; 
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"
  loading="lazy"></iframe>
  
- *Primeirs Symptomes* by **Air** - An EP that serves as a great summary of what
  makes these guys great. Light and pleasant French electronica, with an indie
  rawness that made it sound more warm than slick. [*Memory*: I was aware of
  this disk for years before I got a copy. The physical release was always an
  expensive import, but through the magic of eMusic, I would get a digital copy
  years later, and finally had the complete catalog of this band.]

- *Earthling* by **David Bowie** - I'm proud to say that I have always been a
  fan of 90s Bowie, even when others (even if they wont admit it now) were
  saying he was over the hill. Some of the electronic sounds are dated now, but
  it only adds to the charm. That Bowie magic is still here in a big way.
  "Battle for Britain" is one of my absolute favorites of his without
  qualification. [*Memory*: This brings together two of my biggest interests in
  1997: Bowie and The Internet. Bowie was famously and early advocate for the
  web, and one of the first artists to fully harness its power. I vividly
  remember viewing a RealVideo encoded file at extremely low bitrate of the
  video for the lead single "Little Wonder". The sounds and the technology blew
  my teenage mind.]

- *Karma* by **Delerium** - [**1997 FAVORITE**] - My absolute favorite by these
  guys also happens to be their most widely known. I do enjoy the **Sarah
  McLachlan** fronted mega-hit "Silence" (and the late 90s is the only time
  something like this would be a hit) but my favorite is the stunning "Euphoria
  (Firefly)". The combination of light industrial beats and world music
  exoticism reached a peak on this record. [*Memory*: I remember playing this
  for one of my friends on a drive, and their reaction was: "So this is the kind
  of music you are into now, huh?"]

- *A Short Album About Love* by **The Divine Comedy** - The artist claims to
  have written this album before ever actually being in love, and I think it
  shows. There is something charmingly detached about this collection of love
  songs. A lot of the usual humour ("If") and warmth ("Everybody Knows") that
  would typify the second act for this guy. Probably the beginning of the fully
  mature work for Neil Hannon, and one of his absolute finest moments.
  [*Memory*: When the vinyl reissues came out in 2020, it really made me see the
  whole discography in a new light. I don't know if any album climbed my
  personal ranking more than this one. It really is the kind of thing that needs
  to be listened to in whole, and hits hard in its short running length.]

- *So Much for the Afterglow* by **Everclear** - Music from this era hasn't aged
  very gracefully. Mostly a collection of post-grunge, nu-metal, and pop-punk,
  late 90s rock was a collection of fads that haven't generally stood the test
  of time. The combination of power pop and mature singer songwriter themes on
  display here have held up way better than most of the rock radio favorites of
  the day. Also a pretty killer record from start to finish, which is also a
  rarity for the era. [*Memory*: This is one of the few records from this year's
  list that I was actually into at the time of release. I really enjoyed the radio
  hits, but it was the deep cut "Why I Don't Believe in God" that made this a
  classic album of my teen years. It really connected with where I was at this
  point in my life, and also made me love the banjo as a rock instrument...until
  a bunch of hacks ruined that in the 2010s.]

- *F# A# ∞* by **Godspeed You! Black Emperor** - The start of the journey for
  these guys, and for the genre of chamber, apocalyptic post-rock as well.
  Everything that they continue to do is already fully formed here. I don't come
  back to this one as much, because I feel like the formula was refined in the
  later albums, but I always enjoy it when I do. Perhaps a bit more ambient with
  meandering soundscapes that have been reduced in later efforts, and with a
  generally lighter touch than the crescendo heavy later works. [*Memory*: The
  **Godspeed** records seem to have always been perpetually in print on vinyl,
  and I was able to buy this and complete my catalog of LPs back in the dark
  ages of circa 2009.]

- *Mi  Media Naranja* by **Labradford** - In the 90s and early 2000s, **Ennio
  Morricone** inspired post-rock was a fairly productive sub-genre. A lot of the
  music sounds very much the same, and for me, this is the best product of that
  scene. Moody, vaguely western soundscapes, that sound hopeless and spacious.
  I'm not in the mood for this very often these days, but wow was I about 15-20
  years ago. [*Memory*: This is the kind of record I would have never found
  without the AllMusicGuide. Fairly obscure when I found it, and even more
  obscure today, the AMG article on post-rock considered it a landmark of the
  genre. I'm glad that it pointed me this way.]

- *Flaming Pie* by **Paul McCartney** - In retrospect, this feels like one of
  the most important albums in a very important career. For the first time you can
  hear him coming to terms with his **Beatles** past, and fully engaging with a
  musical future that both considers with what came before, and what lies ahead.
  This was also the last record with the input and presence of his collaborator
  in music and life, Linda. This is where things really started to come
  together, and the brilliant final act of a brilliant musical career had it's
  start. [*Memory*: This was definitely the record I was most excited for at the
  time. I was in the peak of my **Beatles** & **McCartney** fandom, and this was
  the first new release since I had discovered these artists (other than the
  archival "Anthology" and "Live at the BBC" releases). I remember logging into
  the MPL Records website to view the latest posts to the "Flamming Pie Gazette"
  that provided updates on the production of the record. I was so excited to
  hear a short clip of "The World Tonight" in RealVideo format. This record
  invokes nostalgia not just for the music, but also the early web.]

- *Surfacing* by **Sarah McLachlan** - This is one of those records that I
  really enjoy, but wonder if its lasting effect has been negative. Up to this
  point, women's music had been arguably the highlight of 90s pop/rock. The likes
  of **PJ Harvey**, **Tori Amos**, **Alanis** and countless other women were
  making stunning, edgy work that was finding its way to the mainstream against
  all odds. Once the record execs got a look at this lush, pretty record, it
  felt like there was a massive shift in what they were willing to promote. I
  certainly don't want to blame **McLachlan** who is a master at this kind of
  music, but why couldn't it live side by side with all that other really
  awesome stuff that wasn't as easy to fit into the background of TV
  commercials? [*Memory*: I heard "Building a Mystery" for the first time while
  exercising at my physical therapist during a recovery session after breaking
  my left ankle.]

- *Cherry Peel* by **Of Montreal** - Where it all began for Kevin Barnes, it
  sounds stunningly small compared to where he would take his music. A
  collection of good natured, lowfi pop songs with imaginative lyrics and
  melodies, this project was solid from day one. "I can't Stop Your Memory" is a
  tiny masterpiece of retro-pop. It almost sounds like the 1967 **Beatles**
  going back and making music the way they did in 1961. [*Memory*: Thanks to
  eMusic, I probably heard this album years before I otherwise would have. The
  cheap mp3 downloads allowed me to explore obscure back catalog records like
  this one years before streaming made this trivial.]

- *Brighten the Corners* by **Pavement** - A bit more put together than we are
  used to from these guys,  but still had enough of that shambolic magic. That
  said, this is clearly the work of a band and a front man who were starting to
  outgrow their fundamental concept. [*Memory*: About 20 years after the release
  of this record, Spotify radio kept playing the song "Harness Your Hopes" and I
  couldn't figure out why I didn't know the track. Apparently left of this
  album, how in the world did one of the most representatively perfect
  **Pavement** songs not make the track list?]

- *OK Computer* by **Radiohead** - For a significant number of folks, this is
  the best album of the 90s, but it isn't even my top **Radiohead**
  album of the decade. That said, it still is a classic transition record,
  spanning their Britpop roots and the dreary, mixed-genre weirdness to come. I
  feel like the best moments here are the quiet tracks like "Exit Music (For a
  Film)" and "Lucky". A few albums later they would learn to rock out more
  effectively again. [*Memory*: Ironically (given the role they would later play
  in legal downloads) this album reminds me more of the Napster era than any
  other. I wasn't totally ready to buy into these guys as the next big thing,
  but I was happy to download a bunch of their stuff for no money. I now have
  this, and many of their albums, on both CD and vinyl.]

- *Unsound Methods* by **Recoil** - I don't find myself listening to **Alan
  Wilder**'s dark ambient project much these days, but I certainly found it very
  compelling 20 or so years ago. Some of this sounds a bit silly and dated now,
  and not edgy in the way it did back then. The more goth tracks like "Incubus"
  have aged better than the beat poetry based things like "Luscious Apparatus".
  Probably best enjoyed as a late 90s time capsule now. [*Memory*: I got this at
  one of those "used goods" stores that were everywhere in the late 90s. The
  shop (Cash Converters) was often a great source of underrated records by
  popular artists, and obscure gems like this.]

- *Either/Or* by **Elliot Smith** - This is a stunning little collection of
  gentle indie rock tunes. The most beautiful anyone had made sadness sound
  since **Nick Drake**. [*Memory*: Like many folks, I didn't properly get into
  his music until his passing in 2004. It would take me to acquire this
  masterpiece, but it was one of the first bunch of Emusic downloads I made in
  early 2006.]

- *Hard Normal Daddy* by **Squarepusher** - If there was ever a genre I wanted
  more of, it would be whatever this is. This distinctively funky brand of
  break beat laden, jazz-tronica is very unique. This guy is somewhat a genre
  unto himself. That said, the early albums all sound fairly similar, and this
  is far and above the best of the bunch. [*Memory*: I discovered this guy on
  the jazz-tronica show on XM Beyond Jazz, and was able to get his most recent
  work. I knew from the AMG and other sources, this was considered his finest
  work. I would have had to import an expensive CD copy from England on Amazon,
  so this was an early Amazon download for me.]

- *Radiator* by **Super Furry Animals** - Warm and comfy indie rock, with some
  clear links to late 60s **Beatles**-like psych. This gets lumped in with the
  Britpop crowd, but that link is more temporal than musical. A really fun
  record that is quite a breath of fresh air next to the dreary American rock
  music of the day. [*Memory*: Another classic record that I found out about on
  the various music retrospective sites of the early 2000s. Back then you had to
  import CD copies of this kind of thing, and I did.]

- *Urban Hymns* by **The Verve** - Sometimes a song can be too good that it
  overshadows a fantastic album. So it is with "Bitter Sweet Symphony" and this
  record. That song was so ubiquitous in 1997, that all the other gems on this
  album tend to go unremembered. That soaring symphonic sample on "Symphony"
  tends to obscure more subtle mini-masterpieces like "Luck Man", "Sonnet", and
  especially "The Drugs Don't Work". [*Memory*: I was sitting in a high school
  class (Tech Lab 2000) when one of my fellow students put on this CD, and I
  heard "Bitter Sweet Symphony" for the first time. Everyone in the classroom
  loved it. Weeks later I was totally sick of a song that had become massive and
  unavoidable. I never considered buying a copy for myself. I wouldn't pick up
  the disk until a year or two had passed, and I was floored by what I heard.]

1998
----

This was the year that I graduated from high school and started college. I feel
like this is a time in life when I was supposed to be paying very close
attention to pop music, but I just wasn't. My interests were more about classic
rock and the alternative acts of the recent past. That said a few of these
records were something I was into at the time, but the large majority were
discovered in the last two decades of my life. In retrospect it was a
diverse and memorable year for music. The late 90s were a crazy anything goes
time for music and the below list is very much in that spirit. 

.. image:: images/1998.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1998

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/39l6zc5XJAv4JkewueKMpG?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay;
  clipboard-write; 
  encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>

- *Moon Safari* by **Air** - Some bands go on for years, and always seem like
  they are trying to live up to a massive debut record. This is one of those
  cases. It's not that they haven't made some amazing records in the meantime,
  but this one is so original and definitive it almost feels unfair to hold them
  to this standard again. Such a dreamy and chill mood, there have been many
  imitators of this kind of down-tempo psychedelic, electronica, but none match
  this effort. A nice mix of instrumentals and vocal "pop songs", I've listened
  to this hundreds of times and am not the least bit sick of it. [*Memory*: As
  much as I like this now, I was very resistant to it at the time. My co-worker
  was listening to it non-stop in the months after its release, but I really
  didn't connect with it for some reason. It was when I heard it played before a
  **Creed** concert (of all places!) a year or so later I realized that I
  actually love it. That remains true today.]

- *From the Choirgirl Hotel* by **Tori Amos**  - [**1998 FAVORITE**] - The
  creative peak of her early period, this is a fantastic record. I still prefer
  the rawness of **Pele** ever so slightly, but this is definitely my second
  favorite of her albums. This managed to both turn up the rock band elements,
  while adding in strong elements of electronic music. The top rate vocals and
  piano are are still there of course along with some of the last songwriting in
  the original **Tori Amos** style that we would hear for quite some time. The
  one two sequence of "Jackie's Strength" and "Iieee" is one of my favorite in
  music history. [*Memory*: I was already interested in this album pre-release
  due to her contributions to the excellent **Great Expectations: Soundtrack**.
  I was out washing my car on a beautiful early summer day and heard "Spark" on
  WMMR. That was my entry point to one of my lifelong favorite artists.]

- *The Three EPs* by **The Beta Band** - So much more than "Dry The Rain" (as
  heard in Hollywood's version of "High Fidelity"). Admittedly the selection of
  this band, record, and that specific song was perfect for the scene, as this
  is exactly the kind of thing you would hear play in a late 90s independent
  record store. Really interesting long-form, high rhythmic folk-inspired indie
  rock songs. They didn't last long as a band, but they left some great records
  behind, and this is the best of them all. [*Memory*: Like 99% of the world, I
  did find out about this from the movie "High Fidelity". I didn't track down a
  copy of the record until a year or two later. This was one of the last
  (perhaps the very last) record to become part of the "original 400" CDs in my
  collection.]

- *Music Has the Right to Children* by **Boards of Canada** - Electronic music
  that manages to separate itself by its originality and uncompromising quality.
  A mysterious band, these guys have released music sparingly over their career.
  While there have been other high-points, this is still the definitive
  statement. Much of the best from this record manages to sound like music from
  a highly damaged children's TV show (see "Roygbiv" and "Aquarius"). [*Memory*:
  One of those records I can thank the early RateYourMusic for. I had actually
  downloaded several of the tracks several years before I actually had the funds
  to track down a copy of this somewhat expensive (at the time) release.]

- *Gran Turismo* by **The Cardigans** - This dark and moody record was quite a
  shock after the sugary pop of their first two records, and the big hits that
  came with them. Still fantastic pop music, but this time with a more
  introspective and atmospheric electronic backdrop. Lead vocalist Nina
  Peerson's sweet, somewhat slight voice is the perfect counterpoint for the all
  the fuzzy darkness. A lost classic of sorts. [*Memory*: Of all the albums that
  came out that year, this is the one I most associate with my freshman year in
  college. Mostly because of "My Favorite Game" serving as the intro song for
  the PlayStation classic game Gran Tursimo II. I played a lot of PS1 my
  freshman year in college.]

- *Before These Crowded Streets* by **The Dave Matthews Band** - I feel
  validated that there seems to be a growing consensus that this was their best
  work. Certainly the most complex and jazz inspired record, it holds my
  interest in a way the other records that came before and after does not.
  "Crush" is by far the finest track they have produced. [*Memory*: I was very
  resistant of these guys. They always seemed like a cliche of college aged guys
  in the late 90s, a demographic that I had recently joined. This was the album
  that grabbed me, but I would never connect with them again.]

- *And you Think You Know What Life's About* by **Dishwalla** - A few of the
  post-grunge bands were doing something different, and these guys certainly
  were. Inspired by shoegaze and the Britpop sounds of the day, this is an
  interesting second record from a unique American band. "Once In A While" was a
  minor alt rock radio hit at the time, but this album is much more interesting
  in whole. [*Memory*: I really liked this record when it came out, and it
  probably is because I was connecting with the sounds they were borrowing from
  other, more British acts I would discover later.]

- *Fin De Siecle* by **The Divine Comedy** - It can be really difficult to pick
  a best album from an artist that is this consistently great. It has a little
  bit of everything, the jokey fun tracks, the serious slice of life stories,
  presented both as little pop songs, and chamber epics. It even has his biggest
  UK hit in "National Express" which is a terrific little track. There isn't
  really a weak point here either. Top class. [*Memory*: I discoverd and
  absorbed all of his records in two relatively short periods of time. This one
  was something that I spent a lot of time with towards the end of my first
  window of obsession. Why I stopped with this terrific record I am not sure.]

- *Electro-Shock Blues* by **Eels** - A very sad record that manages to not be
  terribly depressing. I think it is because it is a story of managing how one
  deals with bad things happening and the path to a brighter place. Still his
  finest work. [*Memory*: I had been looking for a vinyl copy of this for years,
  when I finally found one that I could import from Germany at a good price in
  early 2023.]

- *Is This Desire?* by **PJ Harvey** - A transitionary work and a great one.
  This was the pivot in her catalog from the aggression of the early records to
  a more subtle and diverse approach that continues to this day. We still have
  some of the growling early Polly Jean here, but the gentler more mature voice
  becomes the dominant sound as things progress. [*Memory*: I didn't really get
  into her music until the more folk inspired records of the 2000s, but when I
  took a look at the back catalog, this was my clear favorite from the more pure
  rock era of her career.]

- *Hooray For Tuesday* by **The Minders** - A pure pop classic from the E6
  folks. As much a triumph of Robert Schneider's production as the musicians
  writing and playing the music. It always feels like **Dr. Dog** and a bunch of
  other pop-revivalists are continuously trying to make a version of this record
  and falling short. "Comfortably Tucked Up Inside" is  remarkable song.
  [*Memory*: This is an album that was always on the best of E6 lists that I was
  consulting around 2006-07, but was much more difficult to source. There was
  eventually a CD reissue that allowed me to experience this gem.]

- *Big Calm* by **Morcheeba** - In its final form, trip-hop started to take on
  qualities similar to vocal jazz. This is the definitive record of the form.
  That lounge scene on the cover definitely captures the general mood here.
  [*Memory*: Other record that I burned from my friend at my job at the time. I
  found a lot of favorites that way evidently.]

- *In the Aeroplane Over the Sea* by **Neutral Milk Hotel** - I find both the
  ridiculously high praise this album got the the early 2000s, and the backlash
  it is experiencing in the early 2020s to both be a bit absurd. This is a
  humble little lowfi psych pop record, no more, no less. Admittedly it is a
  very good one, but the extremely high and low opinions expressed in thought
  pieces published over the last 20 years, make me thing that I am missing
  something or everyone else is. [*Memory*: I didn't really connect with this
  one until I listened to it on a run around a cinder track at my Junior High
  School on a trip back to my hometown around 2010.]

- *Aquemeni* by **Outkast** - Their last album that is still a clear product of
  the rap sounds of that time. After this they would completely go off the map.
  That said, this is one of the best records in late 90s rap, and the entire
  genre's history. If it wasn't for some nonsense filler interludes, this might
  be perfection. [*Memory*: It is hard to listen to this record and not think
  about driving to and from State College, PA. I listened to this on my portable
  CD player on many of those trips.]

- *Yield* by **Pearl Jam** - This was where they were starting to become better
  at ballads like "Wishlist" and gentle rockers like "Given to Fly" than the
  uptempo rockers of their youth. Though this record does contain "Push Me, Pull
  Me" which is one of the more underrated rock songs in their catalog.
  [*Memory*: My co-worker bought this album and played it repeatedly after it
  came out. Over time it completely reversed my opinion of their late 90s output
  and would trigger my era of peak interest in the band.]

- *XO* by **Elliot Smith** - A master of smartly written pop gems, on this
  record, he finally had the production values to really put everything
  together. One of those records that I always forget how amazing it is until I
  put it on. [*Memory*: This was one of the first records that I remember
  listening to on my brand new iPod Nano in 2005.]

- *Trading with the Enemy* by **Tuatara** - Somewhat of an indie super-group who
  specialized in world music influence jazz fusion. The kind of thing that could
  only happen in the 90s. They produced exactly this one great record, with the
  rest of their catalog sorely lacking. [*Memory*: Yet another find from the
  CD-R exchange at work. This was how I found music after commercial radio and
  before the rise of the MP3.]

- *Great Expectations (Soundtrack)* by **Various Artists** - The last of the
  great compilation soundtracks in my opinion. They really don't make them like
  this anymore. At the time it was a curiosity as the solo debut of both **Chris
  Cornell** and **Scott Weiland**. It also served as a mid-career reboot for
  **Tori Amos** who took her singer songwriting to a more complex and upbeat
  place that would anticipate her next few records. Sprinkle in some light
  French electronica from **Mono** and we have a late 90s gem, and a great
  farewell to an album format that was huge in the 80s/90s. [*Memory*: I bought
  this record on the way back from a scholarship interview in Philadelphia. I
  made a targeted trip to the Coventry Mall based exclusively upon the music I
  heard in the trailer for the film. It turned out to be a fantastic record and
  my point of entry to one of my favorite artists, **Tori Amos**]

1999
----

I guess if this project had a very beginning it would be this year. Sometime in
early 2000 I would assemble a mix CD of what I considered to be the best songs
of the prior year. I had recently bought my first CD burner, and one application
I was very excited about was the ability to create compilations that I could
listen to on the Sony Discman that was hooked into a casette adapter in my car.
It was a highly manual process that required me to insert and remove twelve
different albums as each track was added to the CD-R. So what was on
this disc, and how does it hold up 23 years later?

.. image:: images/best_of_1999.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: Old best of 1999 mix CD

It could be way worse! Nine of the sixteen tracks come off of five albums that
are still among my favorites from the year. A further four songs make the list
of my favorite tracks off of records that are not on my album list. That means
that only three tracks have dropped off my radar completely, and they are a
study in how my taste has changed over time.

- "No Leaf Clover" by **Metallica** - I don't know that any other band has aged
  less gracefully than these guys. What used to seem so edgy and hard, now comes
  across as tacky and commercial. At the time I liked this track enough for it
  to kick off the whole comp, but today it feels dated and boring.

- "Higher" by **Creed** - This isn't awful by any means, and it probably still
  ranks as one of their best songs. In general I have no taste for the post
  grunge sound anymore. There are a few selections on the list below that are
  adjacent to this kind of thing, but I just can't take all those distorted
  droning guitars anymore.

- "The Chemicals Between Us" by **Bush** - Listening to this song again, it is a
  bit more interesting than I remember. The structure is fairly ambitious for a
  late 90s alt rock song, and it seems to be alluding to break beats in its
  rhythms. That said, this band suffers from a bad case of crappy 90s guy
  vocalist.

I didn't even own all the albums and had to borrow two of them from a friend to
complete the playlist. This revealed to me another use of the CD burner, piracy.
For the next several years I would use this means to expand my collection beyond
what my current wealth could achieve. It was the age of music piracy after-all.
I had been experimenting with MP3 downloads for the last year or so when
high-speed internet all of a sudden made them way more practical. I remember
sitting in the computer lab of Penn State Berks campus filling up a 100 MB zip
disk a couple dozen tracks from Napster. Looking back, I wasn't really
interested in pirating music, I just wanted a sample top make informed
decisions. We were using Napster like we use Spotify today. Regardless, by 2003
legal music downloads were finally a thing and I went completely legit. It isn't
true of everyone, but I think the download era made me into the music consumer I
am today. I own 4000+ albums in different formats after-all.

Why was 1999 the first year when I decided to make a summing up of my favorites?
This was the dawn of the internet age, and there were a couple hand-crafted
websites out there already doing the same thing that surely were an
inspiration. For me though, it was something deeper. In late 1998 I had moved
out of my parents house. My summer internship was providing me a small amount of
discretionary income, and my discretion was to buy music. Specifically it was my
discretion to buy the music that interested me, all the music that interested
me for the first time in my life. Growing up in a conservative religious cult,
large swaths of pop music were considered evil, the work of "the Devil". I was
mentally out of that mindset for some years, but the physical separation gave me
the freedom to explore my genuine self. Nowhere was this more tangibly evident
than the music I was consuming. Is this why pop music is so important to me? Because
in many ways it was the first medium through which I expressed and explored my
genuine self? I'm glad that so many of my favorites from that time are still
something I enjoy today. They have however been joined by quite a few others.

.. image:: images/1999.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My favorite albums from 1999

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/18oMDAaIvwvgfQcI6dq76I?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; 
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"
  loading="lazy"></iframe>
  
- *To Venus and Back* by **Tori Amos** - Her last album of the 90s and the end
  of a period of massive artistic growth. It's not that Tori has stopped
  innovating after this one, but the rate of growing ambition slowed down a bit.
  The originals on disc 1 take the electronic infused sounds from *Choirgirl* to
  their logical and fulfilling conclusion. Some of the most exciting deep tracks
  that still show up at live shows are here, like "Josephine", "Suede", and
  especially "Lust". The closing track "1000 Oceans" seems to point towards the
  more straight ahead singer-songwriter material that would feature on the next
  few records. Disc 2 is a stunning capture of Tori at her live best. At the
  time it felt a little unnecessary, but today I'm glad we have this record of
  the earliest days of full band Tori Amos performance practice. [*Memory*: This
  is the first of three records on this list that came out the same exact day:
  September 21, 1999. I'll never forget heading to the Best Buy by my college
  with a list of records to pick up. I was particularly interested in this one
  as I had been buying the CD singles that had been released in advance of this
  record. Each one seemed to be better than the one that came before. I remember
  leaving the Wyomissing Boarders with a CD single of "1000 Oceans" and having
  it unwrapped and ready to go in the discman by the time I got to my car. The
  album did not disappoint. Soon after Tori would go on her dual headlining tour
  with Alanis. I remember discussing with one of my work colleagues a plan to
  somehow split the ticket to the Philly show, since we each only cared about
  one of the artists.]

- *When the Pawn...* by **Fiona Apple** - Still my favorite record by her. The
  eccentricity that would define her later work is starting to form, but has yet
  to become grating. Certainly not a commercial record by any means, and it
  pretty much destroyed her career for almost two decades. [*Memory*: This is
  one of those records that I assumed that I would never own on vinyl. Thanks to
  the success of *Fetch the Bolt Cutters* we got a really nice repress on Vinyl
  Me Please in 2021. It cracks me up that they left the pretentiously long title
  off the cover this time. I have to assume she is mildly embarrassed about that
  as an adult.]

- *Euphoria Morning* by **Chris Cornell** - A bit of a lost classic. After the
  horrors of **Audioslave** and his later solo career it can be easy to forget
  about this nice little 60s rock inspired record. In the late 90s it seemed
  like every aging alt-rocker was leaning heavily on the psych-rock of their
  youth. This was a nice showcase of his voice in a set of more low key
  material. If only we had gotten more of this. [*Memory*: The second record on
  this list from 21 September 1999. I was a fan of **Soundgarden** and enjoyed
  his contribution to the **Great Expectations Soundtrack** and was very
  interested in what his solo career would hold. I was very pleased with this
  disc and the solo show I caught later in 1999 at the Tower Theater. After
  that, I can't say I enjoyed his work.]

- *Implode* by **Front Line Assembly** - The beginning of their second phase.
  Elements of techno and other modern electronic music are really starting to
  creep in. This is massively danceable. The world music sounds of their other
  act **Delerium** are also showing up more often. As an adult this is probably
  my favorite of theirs. [*Memory*: I bought this on a bit of a whim during a
  period of high interest in the **Delerium** project. In many ways, this was my
  point of entry to the goth sounds.]

- *Slow Riot for Zero Kanada* by **Godspeed You! Black Emperor** - Very much in
  the sound of their debut LP, this EP is the perfect fit for when you want just
  a taste of the **Godspeed**. Yeah it all sounds very much the same in
  retrospect, but I like that sound. [*Memory*: IN 2021, when I was chasing down my
  favorites from the past to make my vinyl collection as complete as I could, I
  waffled on how much I really needed this. It ended up being the last record I
  bought during that project.]

- *The 3 Way* by **Lilys** - An interesting band that did a bunch of different
  things, and released a ton of albums very quickly. I sought them all out, but
  my favorite will always be this **Kinks** homage. The way that it fuses the
  sounds from those late 60s records with the spirit of 90s indie is a magic
  combination. [*Memory*: This was fairly obscure when I became aware of it in
  the mid-2000s. I remember buying a used copy off of Amazon that didn't even
  have the front cover booklet. I now own an amazing 2019 vinyl pressing that I
  am amazed got made.]

- *Christmas* by **Low** - A remarkable holiday album that feels like an
  incredibly natural thing for this band to create. It is warm and sad, and
  complicated. It really captures the feeling of the holiday season for me and a
  lot of other folks who consider it their seasonal favorite. [*Memory*: Around
  2019 I started to compile a playlist of holiday music that captured the way
  the season felt to me. I discovered this record when researching potential
  candidates to add.]

- *Secret Name* by **Low** - I don't know that any other album lives up to the
  genre of "slowcore" quite like this one. Beautiful music that moves along a
  glacial pace. They hadn't yet mastered their vocal harmonies (that would come
  on the next one) but this has a delightful smallness they would never have
  again. [*Memory*: I was listening to this a lot when I moved into the first
  apartment I lived in alone. Everything was so quiet, and it felt a bit lonely.
  This music really fit with that.]

- *Play* by **Moby** - This guy was everywhere in the late 90s. This guy "is"
  the late 90s. He might not be in fashion anymore, and actually is a bit hated
  today, but this is still some really enjoyable pop-electronica. In fact, with
  its break-beats, world music sounds, and epic production values, this might
  sound more like the late 90s than anything else out there. [*Memory*: In the
  summer of 1999 I took a trip to Niagara Falls with my brother, sister, and a
  high school friend. As we waiting in traffic to get back to the hotel after a
  fireworks show, I heard two songs I didn't know on Edge102. They struck me so
  much that I would start an email exchange with the station to find out what
  they were. I would only have to wait a matter of days to find one of them
  "Porcelain" from this record, when one of my coworkers brought it in and was
  listening to it.]

- *California* by **Mr. Bungle** - The last a best record from these guys. Their
  throw everything at the wall approach didn't generally create cohesive albums
  that were enjoyable from beginning to end, but this one is. Heavy on the
  doo-wap and surf rock genres, it also throws in bits of metal, noise and
  rockabilly. The high points are the eclectic opener "Sweet Charity" and the
  sweet pop of "Retrovertigo". [*Memory*: Another record that makes me think of
  the apartment I lived in by myself around 2005-07. This was my peak era for
  listening to things that were highly rated on RateYourMusic.com. I think this
  was one of the last CDs I ever bough from the Columbia House music club.]

- *The Fragile* by **Nine Inch Nails** - It is wild to think how big of a
  production a hard rock record could be in the late 90s. We still have massive
  overproduced albums, but they are by mainstream pop artists now, not outsider
  electro-industrial outfits. This is one of those double albums that delivers
  on its promise. You get the sense that Trent is no longer as lost or angry as
  he is posturing to be, but man this is compelling stuff. The song "Please" is
  an all time classic blistering NIN track, but once again many of the best
  moments are quieter like the title track, "I'm Looking Forward to Joining You,
  Finally", and especially "The Great Below". His finest work, and a top 5 all
  time record for me. [*Memory*: This is the third of the records to come out
  on 21 September 1999 to make my list. I actually didn't buy this one on the
  day of release, as I only had so much money to throw around. One of my good
  friends did buy it, and put it on at a house party that weekend. I can
  remember clearly listening to it on a boom box on the kitchen table and being
  blown away. I ran out and got my own copy.]

- *The Gay Parade* by **Of Montreal**  - [**1999 FAVORITE**] - I really miss the
  early incarnation of Kevin Barnes making weird little psych pop gems. This is
  the peak of that sound, and a subtly profound mediation on the nature of
  happiness. The Songs that close out the albums are especially profound. "My
  Friend Will Be Me" is about finding the inner strength to fight back the
  darkness of loneliness. "My Favorite Boxer" a set piece exploring the dangers
  of finding fulfillment and meaning in a "relationship" with a media figure.
  The cynical "Advice From a Divorced Gentleman to His Bachelor Friend
  Considering Marriage" calls out the draining trap of negative thinking. The
  stunningly beautiful "A Man's Life Flashing Before His Eyes While He and His
  Wife Drive Off a Cliff into the Ocean" shows how we often only realize how
  good we have it when we are faced with it all being taken away. Then we have
  "Nickee Coco and the Invisible Tree" who's message is complex and completely
  unclear. A young girl who becomes separated from her community seems to find a
  place of peace and calm. Should we feel good when Nickee is found, or did she
  really belong in that tree? [*Memory*: This was the first album I ever spent a
  little more for a used copy of. For several months I watched eBay and
  eventually put down $35 plus shipping for my own copy of the 1999 pressing. It
  is funny to think about that as a lot of money now, since that is pretty much
  the going rate for new albums. I remember a group of us were listening to
  records on my old crappy Sony turntable in the basement game room of my
  apartment in those days, and I dropped the disc on the floor! It survived.]

- *Black Foliage Animation Music: Volume I* by **The Olivia Tremor Control** -
  My favorite of the albums by the core Elephant6 bands. A fascinating, dark
  sound collage, this is music of a particular mood. It makes very little sense
  in daylight, or overly happy times. They only released two records, but they
  were one of the greatest bands of the 90s. [*Memory*: I listened to this a lot
  during the period where I was moving to Rochester around 2008/09. I remember
  jamming it in a mostly empty office while I worked late into the night. It was
  perfect for that environment. In 2010 the E6 bands played a holiday show in
  Buffalo, and I enjoyed getting to hear several of my favorites off of this,
  including the amazing "I Have Been Floated".]

- *Terror Twilight* by **Pavement** - For their last statement, they did
  something a bit more refined, but not that refined. Given the change in
  direction it isn't surprising this was the end. A strong collection of songs
  from one of the defining groups of the decade, and a blueprint that many of
  the 2000s indie bands would mine for content. [*Memory*: I actually didn't
  know very much about this one when Matador released the vinyl reissues in
  2010. I bought it to complete the set, and I'm glad I did.] 
  
- *Stupid Dream* by **Porcupine Tree** - The definitive statement of their mid
  period, alt rock days. Some really interesting long-form rock songs with light
  prog elements. The focus here was definitely the song-writing, and we got some
  standouts, especially "Piano Lessons" and "Stop Swimming". Mostly somber and
  reflective in tone, this isn't happy music, but it isn't depressing.
  [*Memory*: They were still and unknown band in the states when this came out,
  and I only knew about it because of one of my friends from work who got it
  from a friend back in his native Poland. I burned a CD-R off of him, and that
  was my copy until I got the first official US release in the mid-aughts.]

- *Home* by **Sevendust** - I listened to a lot of this kind of NuMetal thing
  back in the day, but most of it hasn't held up. The reason I keep coming back
  to this is the vocals are a step above anything else in the genre. In addition
  to the usual growling we have some really pretty **Deftones**-esque vocal
  harmonies. This shows that a much maligned genre could be better. [*Memory*:
  Every time I see that this album is on my list of favorites I question that
  and think that it can't be true. Then I listen to it, and realize that yeah, I
  do actually like it quite a bit.]

- *Agaetis Byrjun* by **Sigur Ros** - Ethereal beauty is the cliche way to
  describe this one, but it is accurate. They feel like they have spent the rest
  of their career trying to recapture this sound, and as a result have pretty
  much kept duplicating this record. A dreamy atmospheric record for a winters
  day. [*Memory*: I discovered this during a CD-R swap at my summer job in 2002.
  I didn't listen to it until I was back at my college apartment for the next
  year, and I can still picture sitting in my basement room, listening on my PC
  completely blown away by what I was hearing.]

- *Dysfunction* by **Staind** - Wow, what a time capsule of what music sounded
  like back then. The rumbling low tunings, the growling. Oh yeah, this is
  dated, and I have no idea why I am still listening to it almost 25 year later,
  but I am. [*Memory*: I don't believe in the concept of guilty pleasures, but
  this one pushes that boundary. I thought long and hard about whether I could
  put this on the list, but here we are.]

- *No. 4* by **Stone Temple Pilots** - A remarkable record that includes some
  of the better grunge tunes these guys ever made (especially "Down") while
  continuing their development into more subtle territory with pop songs like
  "Sour Girl" and "I Got You". I don't think these guys were appreciated in
  their time, and this album really shows off their range. [*Memory*: This
  album really makes me think of the Penn State Berks Campus that I attended
  from 1998-2000. I was listening to this a lot on my rides into school.]

- *Apple Venus Volume 1* by **XTC** - A truly exceptional record that feels like
  the culmination of the 20+ year journey by these guys. A collection of ornate
  pop gems, its not surprising they decided to stop here. This might the best
  this kind of chamber pop can be done. Andy Partridge was writing 10 great
  songs before breakfast in those days, and even Colin Moulding came up with his
  ultimate statement in the stunner "Frivolous Tonight". [*Memory*: When I
  started to really get into these guys around 2005, this album had already
  almost reached mythical status. Shortly thereafter I was able to actually buy
  a copy when the *Apple Box* set was released.]
