2000s
=====

.. image:: images/2000s.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: Pitchfork Music Festival 2009

2000s Overview
--------------

This project includes albums from a span of 66 years, and over one quarter of
them are from the 10 year span covered on this page. One of the interesting
things about being born in the first year of a decade is that the phases of my
life align with the decades in a very direct way. This is the music of my 20s, a
time of great personal development, and the time when I connected with pop music
most deeply. It was the rise of hip-hop and indie. It was a time when disruptive
technologies changed the way music was made and sold. It was a time when the
innovators started to break from the mainstream of pop music, but the internet
still help them find an audience. I'm glad that I go to be young, but not too
young, in such interesting times.


2000s Stats/Favorites
---------------------

*Section started*: 5 Dec 2021

*Section complete*: TBD

*Latest update*: 09 Sep 2022

*Total Albums*: 262

*Top Artists*:

- 5 Albums (2) - The Fiery Furnaces, Deerhoof

- 4 Albums (4) - Muse, Of Montreal, Spoon

TBD

*Favorite album*:

Not only my favorite album of the 2000s, but my favorite record from the last
20+ years.

*Third* by **Portishead**

.. image:: images/Portishead_-_Third.png
  :width: 400
  :alt: My favorite album from the 2000s

*Favorite Song*:

The heartbreaking...

"Casimir Pulaski Day" by **Sufjan Stevens**

.. raw:: html

  <iframe width="698" height="393" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MsGq_MaO1yg"
  title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; 
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" 
  allowfullscreen></iframe>

...and what a stunning performance of it!

2003
----

Looking at the image below, I see a time that when I think about it seems so
long ago, but somehow also feels like only yesterday. This applies from both a
music/technology standpoint, and my personal life. I remember it
simultaneously like the beginning of the age I still live in, and the fragments of
a very different time.

In 2003 two major changes had come to how I consume music that in some form
persist today. First, I would download the first commercially released digital
music files that would enter my collection. Like almost anyone my age I had used
applications like Napster, KaZaa, WinMX, and Limewire to download music since
the late 90s, but the labels were finally starting to realize they should start
selling the product that young consumers clearly wanted. Interestingly, it was the
McDonald's Monopoly game that would lead me to Apple's nascent iTunes music
store. In the Summer of 2003, the game pieces had a new feature in the form of a
second chance code printed on every game piece. This code could be used to play
an online game for a range of prizes. I forget the details, but somehow I had
worked out the patterns where I was able to receive on nearly every play either:
a free Snapfish digital print (I won hundreds, and still have some to this day)
or a free iTunes download. My total winnings were several dozen downloads that I
would spend on the latest indie hits or back catalog tracks on the store. I was
a poor grad student living in Cleveland for the summer while I worked at NASA
and Micky Ds made a great cheap meal. There were also lots of other folks around
me who weren't exploiting the game that I could get extra game pieces from. What
started humbly, would soon be the primary way me and pretty much everyone else
would acquire music.

The second big change was the introduction of both Sirius and XM satellite
radio. Both services had a soft launch the year before, but 2003 was the start
of the national push. It would be the first major challenge to legacy,
commercial terrestrial radio, and would start a transition that internet radio
and the streaming services would later complete. Shoutcast and other early
internet streaming platforms had introduced me to the idea of expanded and niche
radio playlists, but satellite made this technology professional and put it in
my car. In the summer of 2003, during a visit back to State College on the
weekend break from my responsibilities at NASA, I bought a Sirius plug-and-play
radio at Best Buy. This unit had docking stations that allowed me to listen
either in my vehicle or hooked up to a home stereo. I would quickly discover the
stations Sirius Alt Nation and The Vault. These would expose me to the latest
modern rock hits and semi-obscure classic rock respectively. While I was yet to
discover the Sirius indie channel (Left of Center) there was extensive playlist
crossover, and I was getting dialed into the exciting new developments on
independent labels of the USA, UK, and Canada. What I was hearing an loving on
Sirius was becoming what I spent those harvested iTunes downloads on. The
pipeline of curated, genre programming was motivating digital consumption of new
releases. This system largely persists today, though it is more likely Pandora
or Spotify radio leading to streams on Spotify, Apple Music or YouTube.

This was both the beginning of my independent adulthood, and a time that I can
barely relate to anymore. I was still in school, but I now had a grad student
position that could cover all of my expenses. For part of the year, I was living
in Cleveland, which felt like an exotic far away place, and was the most
distant place from my hometown I had ever spent a significant amount of time.
My newly found financial independence and distance gave me the confidence to
take a major step. Late in 2022, I finally let my family know I wanted nothing
to do with the cult I was raised in. 2003 was the year when I started to work
out what the future was going to be like. In a way, I was starting over as a
young adult. It was a confusing time where I had to find meaning and stability
outside of the harmful organization and limitations I had known before. It was
scary and overwhelming, but more than anything it was incredibly exciting. A
massive weight had been taken off of my shoulders, and I didn't know what I was
going to do next. However, I knew for the first time in my life, right or wrong,
it would be what I wanted to do.

.. image:: images/2003.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2003 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/28T0n5LeiB2hE0HkDV9aS3?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" 
  allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen;
  picture-in-picture" 
  loading="lazy"></iframe>

- *These Are the Vistas* by **The Bad Plus** - I bin the work of these guys into
  two groups, my favorite album (*Suspcious Activity?*) that was unique and
  superior, and the rest. This is the best of the rest. We have the usual mix of
  mostly rock covers, and a few originals. The improvisation is fairly out
  there, but the familiar pop tunes ground the whole thing. The other records in
  the "rest bit" are just like this, just not as good. [*Memory*: This was the
  first record I went out and bought after hearing them on XM Beyond Jazz in
  2006. It was good enough that I went out to get the rest, but with the noted
  exception of *Suspicious Activity?* this would never be topped.]

- *Dear Catastrophe Waitress* by **Bell and Sebastian** - At the time, this was
  a very controversial record. The more polished pop sound offended the fans of
  the earlier chamber folk focussed records. In retrospect, it doesn't feel as
  radical as it was perceived at the time. Yes there is more production here,
  and the songwriting feels a bit more ambitious, but this was more of a gradual
  shift than it was taken to be at the time. In many ways, this is the last
  record by the old version of the band with a few new elements that would point
  to their future form. [*Memory*: This was my point of entry to this band, and
  probably indie pop in general. I remember hearing "Stay Loose" playing on
  Sirius Alt Nation while cooking out on the back deck of my grad school
  apartment. That song (which I loved) was not representative of the album or
  the band in general, but when I did get the album I really liked it as well. I
  would gradually become a fan of pretty much their entire back catalog.]

- *Reality* by **David Bowie** - The third, and probably best of the
  neo-classical Bowie records. A reflective period where the artist was making
  new music that was inspired by, but only tangentially related to his classic
  70s records. A really perfect latter career record, and "Never Get Old" is one
  of his very finest songs of all. [*Memory*: At the time I assumed that he
  would go on forever making excellent records like this every few years, and
  touring regularly. This would be his last record for more than a decade, and
  his last tour ever.]

- *Long Gone Before Daylight* by **The Cardigans** - What happened to these
  guys? They were such a happy pop band, but now they are making sad
  country-esque songs. The singer even went from blonde to full black hair goth.
  It works pretty well though. A really enjoyable, if a subdued and somewhat
  downtrodden record. [*Memory*: I remember listening to this frequently during
  my early days in my first job. I apparently didn't buy this until it had been
  out for a few years.]

- *Transatlanticism* by **Death Cab for Cutie** - I've always wondered how much
  of the breakout success of this record was due to the massive success of the
  **Postal Service** record right before this. That said, Ben Gibbard's primary
  band hit the bit time after this one. This was their last records as an indie
  rock artist, as the majors and the arenas would be waiting. This still stands
  as their finest work, and the lack of perfect polish adds a charm missing in
  their later work. [*Memory*: I don't know that any song is more 2003 than
  "Title and Registration." When I hear all about that glove compartment I'm
  taken back to the world of my 23 year-old self.]

- *Apple O'* by **Deerhoof** - Their early albums are interesting, but a little
  too rough around the edges to be totally listenable. They got things together
  here, and while this still has a serious edge, it always centers itself in a
  way that make it digestible. Lots of wild drumming, heavy guitars, and cutesy
  weirdness. This is the formula that would make for their strongest stretch of
  records. [*Memory*: My vinyl copy of this was a record store day exclusive. I
  miss when RSD was more about the kind of small label artists that need those
  kinds of special releases.]

- *Chimera* by **Delerium** - This is where they started adding more light pop
  elements, and the remaining ambient industrial elements faded a bit. There is
  still enough of their classic period sound here for me to really dig the
  record, but I haven't connected with anything since. It is interesting how
  Kristy Thirsk finishes out the album with the excellent "Returning". She
  started their classic period with "Flowers Become Screens" on *Semantic
  Spaces*, and has book-ended their most successful era. [*Memory*: I had
  totally forgotten about this record and it was one of my big rediscoveries
  while doing the prep work for this list.]

- *The Earth Is Not a Cold Dead Place* by **Explosions in the Sky** - Post-rock
  has fallen out of favor in recent years, and it can be hard to remember this
  was once considered one of the finest records of the decade. It still is one
  of the greatest works in that much maligned genre, and instrumental music that
  manages to be more than a background. It will always be most famous as the
  backdrop to Friday Night Lights, but it is very easy to enjoy all on its own.
  [*Memory*: In 2006 I downloaded many of the key post-rock releases from
  eMusic. This was one of the first I checked out, as much for its reputation as
  for it being 6 tracks long, and eMusic was billing me by the song.]

- *Gallowsbird's Bark* by **The Fiery Furnaces** - Most of what made them great
  is already on display in this debut. The unpredictable, inventive
  instrumentation and structure along with the highly unusual style of
  performance unique to this duo. The songwriting is a little raw and not up to
  the standards of the next few releases. I don't listen to this often, but
  there are a couple great songs here, and a whole lot of potential. [*Memory*:
  I actually didn't like this record that much, but my completionist tendency
  led me to add it to my otherwise complete vinyl catalog of the band. After a
  few listens on the big black disc, my opinion became more favorable. The same
  did not happen with *Rehearsing My Choir*.]

- *Sumday* by **Grandaddy** - The middle record in the outstanding trilogy of
  releases that closed this band's original career is the most subtle of the
  bunch. This is much more like their early releases, mostly comprised of upbeat
  little pop songs accented by electronics. It ends with a moody cluster of
  three tracks which would have fit right in on the prior record, including the
  superb closer "The Final Push to the Sum". [*Memory*: I found out about this record
  trading music with a friend. I loaned her **The Thrills** debut, as a
  California resident I was curious about her opinion of their homage. She
  responded by sharing more authentically California sounds.]

- *Bodysong* by **Jonny Greenwood** - So many folks with a music degree are very
  jealous of the attention **Radiohead**'s guitarist gets for his "Classical"
  style movie scores. This first score proves that the attention was warranted,
  from the beginning. A tremendously interesting soundscape that does the
  screechy violin style contemporary classical better than lots of folks who go
  to school for years to make it. [*Memory*: Sirius Alt Nation used to play some
  pretty out there stuff in the early days. That is where I found out about this
  release. I didn't even realize who the artist was until after I tracked down
  the somewhat obscure CD.]

- *Precollection* by **Lillys** - An interesting combination of their preceding
  Kinks inspired sounds, and 80s psych acts like **Echo and the Bunnymen** and
  **The Church**. In other words designed for me to like. [*Memory*: I heard
  their newest songs on Sirius in 2005, and later found this on discount at
  Mike's Movies and Music. After picking this up, I had to checkout there entire
  diverse catalog. I remember having to import some of the more obscure EPs from
  the UK, for a higher sum than I would typically pay for a CD.]

- *Deloused in the Comatorium* by **The Mars Volta** - Progressive metal was
  quite a departure for these guys after the post-hardcore of **At The Drive
  In** but it works out great here, and many albums that followed. Almost like a
  punk based **Rush**. [*Memory*: One of those albums I saw for years on the
  rateyourmusic top lists. That **Pink Floyd** like cover is an attention
  getter. Once I finally gave it it try, I was happy with the content as well.]

- *Absolution* by **Muse** - This was the album tha finally got some attention
  in the USA, and it is easy to see why. This downplays the progressive elements
  of the last record a bit, and provides something that is a bit more straight
  ahead hard rock. This was the perfect thing for all the folks who listened to
  90s alt-rock, but who weren't digging all the post-grunge of the day.
  [*Memory*: Another Satellite radio discovery. For some reason Sirius ALt
  Nation picked up on this almost a year after it was first released.]

- *Electric Version* by **The New Pornographers** - From a pure pop song
  standpoint, this is their finest moment. A tremendous collection of simple,
  hook laden tunes that do a lot with the same few elements. They had to get a
  bit more complicated from here on out to keep things interesting, but there is
  a real appeal to the simple treats on offer here. [*Memory*: "From Blown
  Speakers" has to be one of the songs that I have listened to the most in my
  life. How many hundreds of times have I listened to that 2:49 of pop
  perfection?]
  
- *Speakerboxxx/The Love Below* by **Outkast** - At times I have wondered if
  this album happened organically or if at some point a decision was made to
  produce a sprawling, divergent double album designed to signal the creative
  parting of the ways. Perhaps a bit of both. Regardless, what we have here is a
  very diverse collection of genres and styles, and the majority are done quite
  well. At this point it is mostly known as the record that produced the
  all-time hit single of "Hey Ya!", but there is a lot more here to like, from
  the wildly creatively and very funky southern hip hop of "The Rooster" to the
  genre bending psychedelic R & B of "Roses" that almost seems to anticipate
  future artists like **Janelle Monae**. [*Memory*: I bought this record at
  Circuit City the day it came out, and the second I heard "Hey Ya!" I knew it
  was going to be a massive hit. Everyone would soon know who **Outkast** were,
  but only a few short years later, they were gone.]

- *Give Up* by **The Postal Service** - A massively influential record that
  spawned dozens of imitation indie-electronic pop acts, most of which were
  terrible. Somehow the brightness and earnestness does not become grating here,
  and what would soon sound tired, is still innovative. It is probably good that
  this project never spawned a second record, as that might have been bad as
  well. What is recorded here though is almost universally brilliant. [*Memory*:
  This record had a really slow rise to prominence. It came out in January of
  2003, and I didn't hear anything of it until I caught "Such Great Heights" on
  Sirius Alt Nation in the summer of that year. I was still early. It wasn't
  until the song appeared in several commercials in 2004 and the movie Garden
  State (yuck!) happened, that this became the indie landmark we think of
  today.]

- *The New Romance* by **Pretty Girls Make Graves** - An outstanding anomaly of
  the post-punk revival that dabbles in new wave and pop-punk songs. It actually
  sounds a bit like music that would be very popular only a few short years
  later. It is a shame that this band has become so obscure over time, this
  really holds up well. [*Memory* Another discovery on Sirius Alt Nation in my
  early days listening to satellite radio. I bought a download of "Something
  Bigger, Something Brighter" but it would take me several years to finally get
  the record. While that is still my favorite song, This is a solid album
  throughout.]
  
- *Hail to the Thief* by **Radiohead** - A less consistent record than what came
  before, but the highs are very high. "2 + 2 = 5" is an especially great song,
  and the last big rocker these guys would ever make. This is where the sleepy
  mid-tempo tunes started to appear in large numbers, and they aren't all as
  interesting as the classic "There, There". [*Memory*: For some reason I
  downloaded the song "There, There" years before I ever heard this record. It
  was one of the first **Radiohead** songs I was really into, and kind of a
  strange point of entry. Maybe it was the recent single of that time?]

- *Chutes Too Narrow* by **The Shins** - A very similar sound to their first
  record, but not quite as good. That said another very pleasing power pop
  record. [*Memory*: "So Says I" was the first track I heard from these guys,
  but when I went out to find the album I had to settle for the first record,
  since it was all I could find at Circuit City that day. I eventually found
  this record at Tower Records in King of Prussia. It is hard to remember the
  days when looking for music was a struggle.]

- *Michigan* by **Sufjan Stevens** - A much smaller, humbler folk record than
  the second (and final) state album *Illinois**. Some very pretty, somber
  music. Listening to this now, this sounds more like the best record from his
  early period, and less like the start of the golden middle career. [*Memory*:
  Every once in a while I will file away a long held memory, about a
  fairly minor event in my life with an accompanying soundtrack. In 2005 I moved
  out of my last college apartment, and got a place of my own. There would no
  longer be bus service regularly to campus. Somehow this finally felt like
  adulthood. I rode the North Artherton bus into central campus to visit the
  engineering library one last time and the instrumental track "Redford" played
  giving this moment a far more profound atmosphere than it probably deserved.]

- *Room On Fire* by **The Strokes** - The sweet spot of this band for me. It
  still has the edgy post-punk sound of their first record, but with more of the
  poppy-ness that would dominate the later releases. The Albert Hammond Jr.
  penned song "Automatic Stop" is my favorite song of theirs. [*Memory*: This
  was the very first thing I discovered on Sirius Satellite radio in 2003. It
  was my gateway to 2000s indie.]

- *So Much for the City* by **The Thrills** - A bunch of sunny pop songs about
  California by a bunch of people from Scotland. A unique concept for a record
  that works out surprisingly well. Both an early specimen of 2000s indie-pop
  and somewhat of a musical anomaly with little to compare it to. [*Memory*:
  After hearing "One Horse Town" on Sirius Alt Nation I went to the local indie
  record store City Lights for the first time to look for a copy. I remember
  going to the counter and the owner telling me he was happy to sell "a nice
  record for a nice price." He would sell me many records in the years ahead.]

2004
----

This was the year that indie broke into the public consciousness, thanks to a
string of key records that had come out that year, and the previous.
Admittedly I had been progressively starting to listen to this kind of music
without totally realizing it. Today it is easy to draw a line between the kind
of alt rock that grew out of the late 90s and the indie rock that would dominate
the next decade. At the time things were less clear. It was especially confusing
for me, since I was discovering a lot of new things on the nascent Sirius
Satellite radio. Sirius had two stations I listened to regularly: one called Alt
Nation (ostensibly the music that grew out of 90s alt rock) and Left of Center
(ostensibly music of the past and current day released on independent labels).
The truth was more complicated, with quite a bit of overlap between the two
stations and progressively, Left of Center became more about the indie
aesthetic, instead of any sort of statement about how the music was produced. My
tastes started to lean heavily towards these indie sounds, and I felt like a
music connoisseur. Little did I know that millions of others my age were doing
the very same thing at the same time. Indie would also be distinct from the
mainstream pop of the same era, but it was a significant cultural and commercial
force.

This was probably the most difficult year of my life. My time in grad school
came to an unexpected end, and I found myself suddenly looking for my
first real job. My first significant relationship had ended and my interactions
with my family continued to be strained as a result of my leaving the extreme
religion that they belonged to. Despite all that, there was also a strong
feeling of potential under all the struggle. I graduated with my Masters degree,
and thanks to an research assistantship, had no debt. While I felt a bit alone
and somewhat estranged from my family, I also felt free to make my own decisions
in a way that I never had before. Life was hard, but still very exciting. When I
look at the albums below, I remember the struggle and hope for the future. This
where I started building the good life I have today.

.. image:: images/2004.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2004 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/2iDooHc4MhACleaMqOnUPV?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" 
  allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>

- *Funeral* by **The Arcade Fire** - Besides the **Postal Service** record that
  had come out the year before, no other record was more influential in the
  "mainstreaming of indie" than this one. Still a stunning record today, only
  Canadian bands can be this over the top and not seem ridiculous. This music
  feels simultaneously designed for youth to dance in music festival fields, and
  to sell various products through television commercials and movie trailers.
  [*Memory*: I became aware of "Neighborhood #1" when it was the iTunes free
  download of the week in fall of 2004. I loved it, but I was so broke at the
  time I wouldn't even consider getting the whole record. Shortly thereafter I
  heard "Neighborhood #3" playing in the background at Darkhorse Tavern in State
  College, PA. I remember dedicating some of my limited funds to buy a copy at
  Circuit City, one of the last CDs I bought before getting a job in early
  2005.]
  
- *Talkie Walkie* by **Air** - Their most "poppy" record, with nearly every
  track a somewhat conventional song. Those chill electronic sounds accented
  with guitars and wind instruments are still there, but now with chill abstract
  lyrics. I have a strong personal attachment to *Moon Safari*, but this is
  probably their objectively best record with the widest appeal. [*Memory*: I
  can't hear this record without thinking of Cleveland Ohio. This ended up
  becoming the soundtrack to my second summer working at the NASA Glenn Research
  Center. Many mornings on my drive into the research center I was listening to
  this on my CD discman connecting to my car stereo via a cassette adapter. This
  was the first time that I remember finding one of my favorite semi-obscure bands
  playing on satellite radio. I remember hearing "Cherry Blossom Girl" and
  "Surfing on a Rocket" playing though the portable receiver unit suction cup
  mounted to my dash.]

- *Misery is a Butterfly* by **Blonde Redhead** - The albums from the first half
  their career all have a fairly similar sound. This is where they stared to
  pivot to full on dream pop. It suits them well, and this and the next one
  captures them in top form, before they went overboard on the pop. [*Memory*:
  This was a retrospective discovery. After loving *23* I was able to explore
  the whole back catalog thanks to eMusic.]

- *Bright Like Neon Love* by **Cut Copy** - This album sounds both incredibly
  derivative of classic synthpop bands (especially **New Order**), and
  completely ahead of the trends. In only a few short years, the "imagined 80s"
  era of indie music would commence, and this is possibly the first notable
  record in that trend. [*Memory*: I only listened to this record after knowing
  and loving the two that came after. In fact I heard this for the first time
  after buying the vinyl reissue at Record Store Day 2013.]

- *Absent Friends* by **The Divine Comedy** - I have a hard time picking a
  favorite from this guy, but this is the most likely answer for me. Fits in
  well with the indie chamber pop of the time, only at a much higher level. Less
  humor than what came before (and in the most recent records), but plenty of
  wit and obscure references. The sound of an artist getting older, but no less
  interesting or relevant. [*Memory*: This record will always be linked with the
  fantastic live performance video that captured one of the largest and most
  interesting configurations of his band.]

- *The Dresden Dolls* by **The Dresden Dolls** - A really unique idea that
  worked out for exactly one album and a song. Surely the only piano punk duo to
  make it to the big time never equaled their self titled debut as a band or in
  their solo work. There is actually quite a bit of range here: the straight
  ahead pop punk of "Gravity", the quirky vaudeville of "Coin-Operated Boy", and
  the sweet old time torch singing of "Jeep Song". [*Memory*: I think this is
  the song that led me from Sirius Alt Nation to Left of Center. The same person
  programmed both channels at the time, and there was a clear intent to bridge
  between the two. In many ways this is the perfect music to make the journey
  from 90s alt rock to the best part of 2000s indie.]

- *Ta det lungnt* by **Dungen** - An often blistering, often quite sweet
  psychedelic rock record where I understand none of the lyrics and don't care.
  Still my favorite of theirs. [*Memory*: Looking back, I must have discovered
  75% of the music I was listening to on Sirius. I can still remember hearing
  this for the first time while brewing beer in the kitchen of my new apartment
  and looking at the display to get the band info so I could acquire the disc.]

- *Let it Die* by **Feist** - Before her iPod commercial, Lesley Feist was just
  another indie folk-popper, although a quite brilliant one. This kind of
  electronics accented chamber folk was about to become all the rage, and few
  albums have done it quite as well as this one. The DIY whimsey of
  "Mushaboom"'s sound and video would spawn a myriad of imitators, but no one
  (especially not Zooey Deschanel) could quite pull it off the same way.
  [*Memory*: I heard "Mushaboom" for the first time on a Music Choice TV
  channel, even before satellite radio picked it up.]

- *Blueberry Boat* by **Fiery Furnaces** - Just as wild sounding now as it was
  back then. This was definitely their attempt at a new kind of progressive
  rock. Epic art rock telling nonsensical stories about blueberry captains going
  down with their ship and eating tacos for lunch. This works better than it
  seems like it should, and has aged better than anyone could have imagined.
  [*Memory*: It is wild to think this used to be in the top 5 of the
  RateYourMusic chart for 2005. That is how I found out about it. For some
  reason some of the more extreme forms of indie have not kept their status, and
  this is now outside the top 200.]

- *EP* by **Fiery Furnaces** - The shorter more conventional pop songs that
  didn't fit conceptually or space-wise on *Blueberry Boat*, many of these are
  their most enduring tunes like the whimsical "Tropical-Iceland" and the
  sugary sweet "Here Comes the Summer". One of my favorite indie-pop records
  from a band that typically is making much more challenging music.

- *Franz Ferdinand* by **Franz Ferdinand** - The first post punk revival band to
  realize the indie kids wanted to dance. A massively influential record in
  retrospect, and just as enjoyable today as the day it was released. I recently
  heard this described as classic rock, and while that feels a little weird, it
  is absolutely true. [*Memory*: I heard "Take Me Out" streaming Virgin radio
  in my grad student office. I was often listening to UK radio at the time,
  since their indie scene was peaking. I wrote an E-mail to Sirius Satellite
  radio to request the current US Single "Darts of Pleasure". They played it,
  but I remember the DJ kind of making fun of it. I was right!]

- *Thunder, Lightning, Strike* by **The Go! Team** [**2004 Favorite**] - For a
  moment, it looked like there was going to be some sort of huge new genre that
  involved hyperactive, rapid fire samples. This kind of post-modern pop didn't
  end up being that big of a deal, but it did produce this brilliant record.
  Interestingly, there are two different versions of this album. While I do miss
  some of the original samples featured in the 2004 UK release, I prefer the
  expanded version that came out the following year in the US. [*Memory*: I
  hated this at first. The samples seemed so garish to me when this started
  getting big plays on Sirius Left of Center in late 2004. For whatever reason
  it was the amateurish, childlike "Hold Yr Terror Close" that would get me on
  board when the "legal" version of the record was released in the fall of
  2005.]
  
- *The Lost Riots* by **Hope of the States** - I really wish there were more
  bands that took the basic ideas of post-rock to make more conventional song
  based albums. This seems like an obvious idea, but this record is one of the
  few examples where this is done well. The opener, "The Black Amnesias", isn't
  very far from the likes of **Explosions in the Sky** or **Godspeed You! Black
  Emperor**, but then we diverge into the post-Britpop of **Muse** or **Doves**.
  A really pretty hard rock album [*Memory*: My lack of funds in 2004 meant that
  many of the things I would hear and enjoy on satellite radio would not enter
  my collection. There were a list of tracks I had saved in the memory of my
  plug and play radio that I wouldn't explore further until many years later.
  "The Red The White The Black the Blue" was one of my favorites on Alt Nation
  back in the summer of 2004, but I wouldn't get the CD until sometime in the
  year 2007. It immediately became a favorite, and I was left to wonder why they
  didn't become a bigger thing.]

- *Antics* by **Interpol** - A bit of a lighter mood on this one, with what
  could almost be described as a pop sound at times. It suits them well, and
  this is my favorite record by these guys. "Evil" is an amazing song and is a
  perfect way to summarize this highly successful change of direction.
  [*Memory*: I think if I would have picked a favorite record at the time, it
  would have been this one. Listening to this today makes me feel very nostalgic
  for what was a very difficult time in my life.]

- *Hot Fuss* by **The Killers** - The birth of "indie" bands debuting on major
  labels, but what an outstanding way to start. This is generally seen at the
  genesis of UK "landfill indie", despite being the work of a US band. Without
  question, this sound would be very overused and tired only a year later but
  it feels fresh and compelling here. [*Memory*: This was one of only two albums
  I bought during my days of limited financial means between grad school and my
  first job. I like "Jenny Was a Friend of Mine" that much. The other was *The
  Bends* by **Radiohead**, with both coming from the Columbia House Record
  Club.]

- *Good News for People Who Love Bad News* by **Modest Mouse** - My favorite
  "sellout record". This is widely perceived as a difficult indie darling
  changing their sound to appeal to the masses. I prefer to see it as a
  difficult indie darling finding a way to turn their sound into a platinum
  seller. When I heard "Float On" for the first time I knew it was going to be
  a monster hit. [*Memory*: I remember having an argument about the merits of
  this album with a hardcore fan who gave me a drive home from a party in 2004.
  That argument has repeated at least a half a dozen times since.]

- *You Are the Quarry* by **Morrissey** - All of a sudden Moz was an indie
  artist again, and was making fantastic music. It seems likely that this will
  stand as his last classic record, and his last moment in the popular
  consciousness for his music and not his sour personality. [*Memory*: Shortly
  before this release I had starting listening to the artist and his band **The
  Smiths**. In those days, the first thing you heard in the Rock and Roll Hall
  of Fame was "How Soon is Now" in the intro video to the museum. After my
  initial dive into the back catalog I started hearing "Irish Blood, English
  Heart" on satellite radio, and was excited that the man was still making great
  music. Shortly after "First of the Gang to Die" would be an even bigger indie
  hit, and I would run out to the local Best Buy to grab this one.]

- *Mr. Beast* by **Mogwai** - Admittedly, these guys tend to make music that
  sounds pretty much the same. The albums that have become my favorites tend to
  be the ones that hit a little different. On this record, the piano comes to
  the front in a way that builds interest in a way that the more guitar focussed
  albums do not. "Auto Rock" is probably my favorite song by the band.
  [*Memory*: This was the new album by the band, at the time that I was
  exploring their back catalog. Even at that time it was very apparent to me,
  how much this still sounded like what they were doing in the late 90s.]

- *The Slow Wonder* by **A.C. Newman** - His solo material tends to sound
  exactly like **The New Pornographers** without all the harmony vocals. This
  record ended up getting some of his best material from an era that would
  produce two of the finest records from that band. This is one of the greatest
  power-pop records ever made. [*Memory*: This is the first album I discovered
  via the nascent Pandora platform in late 2005. I heard the outstanding "On the
  Table" there, and it not only led me to this fine record, but to one of my
  favorite bands for the next few years.]

- *Satanic Panic in the Attic* by **Of Montreal** - This album was my point of
  entry to what would become one of my favorite artists over the next decade. In
  retrospect, this mid period work is the perfect fusion of the early **Beach
  Boys** inspired psychedelic pop and the funky electronica that would come
  later. At the time, Kevin Barnes changes seemed sudden and jarring, but
  looking back a conceptual unity has come into focus. [*Memory*: I learned
  about this band when a song from the next record, "I Was Never Young" was used
  in a modified form for a commercial. As was my custom in the day, I used the
  AllMusicGuide to identify and obtain their highest rated record, which turned
  out to be this one. It was the perfect point of entry that led me to not only
  this fine artist, but the related Elephant6 collective that would dominate my
  listening for almost the next decade.]

- *Drag it Up* by **Old 97's** - A really appealing combination of old time
  country tinged rock and roll and power-pop. One whiskey tinged song of
  heartbreak after another. [*Memory*: Another record I first heard about on
  satellite radio in my days of being broke that I wouldn't buy until years
  later. In this case not until 2010.]

- *The Blue Album* by **Orbital** - I kind of wish they didn't make their
  comeback in the 2010s. This was the perfect way to go out. An ambitious record
  that builds on their album oriented techno roots and goes in a bunch of new
  directions that mostly work. [*Memory*: This was actually my point of entry
  for this duo, and I would work backwards to their classic 90s stuff. I heard
  "You Lot" on the Sirius Liquid Todd show, and immediately sought out the high
  points of their catalog. Maybe because I heard this first, I tend to rate this
  much higher than most fans.]

- *More Adventurous* by **Rilo Kiley** - The highpoint for this band, and one of
  the finest indie pop records ever made. The country tinged pop songs contained
  here are the strongest, most fully realized statement from this act. If you
  were to make a single CD compilation of 2000s indie, "Portions for Foxes" has
  to be on there. [*Memory*: Without question the reason I (or almost anyone)
  knows about this record is due to the participation of lead singer **Jenny
  Lewis** on the **Postal Service** record the year before.]

- *From a Basement on a Hill* by **Elliot Smith** - Another of the records that
  feels designed to transition a 90s alt-rock fan into an indie music fan. There
  is also a symphonic 60s Beatles style vibe here as well. This feels like it
  was specifically made to appeal to my generation. It is of course difficult to
  separate this record from the tragic suicide of the artist. The outstanding,
  but troubling "King's Crossing" is a compelling but difficult listen knowing
  how things would end. [*Memory*: I listened to this repeatedly during the most
  difficult period in my life. Listening to it now I don't feel the bad, but
  instead remember the strength and resilience it took to get to a far better
  place.]
  
- *Bows and Arrows* by **The Walkmen** - "The Rat" was their big break into the
  big time, and is still a great track. I much prefer the weirder, warmer sounds
  of "What's in It for Me" and "No Christmas While I'm Talking". This is their
  most famous record, but it doesn't do a good job representing what made them
  great. [*Memory*: This was my point of entry like many folks. I, of course had
  heard "We've Been Had" on that Saturn Ion commercial that played for years up
  to this point, but "The Rat" was a phenomenon I could not ignore. At this
  point I was traveling home from Cleveland every weekend with the hope of
  reconnecting with my ex. Since my PC was at my place in Ohio I remember
  putting this into my CD boom-box for the first listen.]

- *A Ghost is Born* by **Wilco** - An amazing followup that doesn't get enough
  credit. Yes they go a bit to far with the weird electronic noise at the end,
  but otherwise this is a masterpiece of pop and country. "Theologians" might be
  their single greatest pop song. There are some amazing instrumental passages
  on this record that really show off the instrumental talent of this band.
  [*Memory*: In the fall of 2005 I would buy an Ipod Nano, my first real MP3
  player. This was one of the first albums I loaded on the device and I remember
  playing it through my car stereo as we waited for the gates to open at our
  Penn State tailgating lot.]

- *Smile* by **Brian Wilson** - This has largely been replaced by the archival
  presentation of the **Beach Boys** attempts at this material. That said, this
  is probably the more refined and complete version. Also without this, I doubt
  the attempt would have been made to assemble the original recordings.
  [*Memory*: I didn't look into this when it was released to great fanfare. It
  would take until 2009 until I finally gave this a chance. It would make me
  realize there was much more to the **Beach Boys** than *Pet Sounds*.]

2005
----

I have developed a pattern for how I compile the sections for each year. Around
the time that I start writing for the year I am working on immediately prior
(which is actually the next year, since I am doing this in reverse) I look at my
list for the next year to be addressed (which is actually the year before) and
decide if any changes are required. I also decide if there are any records I
want to seek out on vinyl that I do not currently have, so that they can appear
in the picture. I knew going in that this was the year that I had the lowest
ratio of favorites owned on vinyl, with only just over a third in my collection
as LPs. Then started a surprisingly difficult sub-project to get my vinyl ratio
to 50% for 2005. It took so long that I am starting on the writing well before I
will be able to get a picture, but I did locate some really nice additions to
get myself to my target. Why is the vinyl ratio so low this year? I think the
number one factor is that this is the end of the "vinyl dark ages" when the
format was in full decline, but not enough time has passed for 20 year reissues
and other forces to get these records back in print. I also think that it is
just far enough away from when I started buying records (2008) that these
releases were not fresh in mind, and therefore not on my list to repurchase on
the big discs. Finally, there are a number of legitimately obscure indie records
here that are likely to never see a vinyl reissue.

This is where the acceleration in my music purchasing would begin. In early 2005
I would get my first real job, and one of the places those new found funds would
go are full price CDs from Mikes Movies & Music in State College, PA. I was
mostly looking backwards to explore the music of the past, but I was also
exploring the indie rock of the day with the help of Sirius Left of Center, NPR
Music, and the early music blogs. Access to funds, and the range of means to
discover good new music emboldened me to  This would be the year where I bought
my last CDs from the last remaining record club, Columbia House. It would also
be the last year where no album found a way into my collection digitally.

.. image:: images/2005.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2005 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/3qMJLuwCwQSfwfF938Hwlp?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" 
  allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"></iframe>

- *Extraordinary Machine* by **Fiona Apple** - This album had the strange
  distinction of having leaked in full, in a very different form several years
  before this official release. At the time, I very much preferred the most more
  eccentric, almost mid-period **Tom Waits** sound of the first release, but I
  have warmed up to the official version. What would get released by the label
  was much closer to *When the Pawn...* which happens to be one of my favorite
  records of all time. This is the last album before she destroyed her wonderful
  voice with smoking. [*Memory*: At the time I felt so betrayed by the official
  release that felt like it went against the out there wishes of the artist and
  producer. We now know that at least some portion of the unofficial version was
  made by fans based on an incomplete, in-progress cut.]

- *I Sold Gold* by **Aqueduct** - A lost classic that I feel very fortunate to
  know about. Such a good natured, electro indie-pop record with huge hooks and
  pretty melodies. This guy arrived with a full set of songwriting and home
  production skills. I wish he has made more records. [*Memory*: Every now and
  then Sirius Left of Center would become the champions of a relatively obscure
  record that would get no play or attention anywhere else. I always wondered if
  it was label relationships or DJ preferences that made this happen.
  Regardless, I feel very fortunate to have hear the pop masterpiece "Gowing Up
  With GNR" on the station back in '05.]

- *Suspicious Activity?* by **The Bad Plus** - This live recording is rougher
  around the edges than their other more conventional jazz recordings, and there
  are far fewer "covers". It is also my favorite. These, often wildly
  improvisational, originals are a peak that I don't think they would ever
  replicate again. The opening track "Prehensile Dream" is about as exciting as
  contemporary jazz has ever sounded. [*Memory*: This makes me miss XM Beyond
  Jazz. That is where I discovered this band and album when I heard "Rhinoceros
  Is My Profession" in early 2006. The format of that station made jazz feel
  like a living, still in progress art form.]

- *Push Barman to Open Old Wounds* by **Belle and Sebastian** - Actually an EP
  compilation that covers roughly the decade preceding its release. This was the
  first time I heard any of these tracks, and the originals are deleted from the
  catalog...so this counts as a 2005 record! It is also my favorite release by
  these guys. The spare, simplicity of the early EPs captures the charm of their
  early chamber pop sound better than any of the LPs from the same era. Later
  songs like "Jonathan David" feel like a preview of the 70s pop sounds that
  would soon dominate their releases. [*Memory*: In the early days of collecting
  vinyl, I found an original press of this collection, but I didn't want to pay
  $45 for it at the time. It is absurd to think about this given what records
  cost now, but I would get a chance at a re-press almost a decade later.]

- *Silent Alarm* by **Bloc Party** - A wonderful later work in the post-punk
  revival scene. It follows on well from the UK Indie sounds of the early 2000s,
  and layed down a blueprint for the "mainstream-indie" sound that would sell
  many records in the next decade. These guys were ahead of the new wave revival
  curve in a way that no-one seemed to notice at the time, especially on the
  outstanding "Banquet". [*Memory*: This album got tons of play on both Sirius
  Left of Center, and Alt Nation, the clearest indication of indie's growing
  mainstream relevance.]

- *Broken Social Scene* by **Broken Social Scene** - This Canadian indie
  collective would eventually become too massive and unfocused for me, but this
  record captured them at their peak. This is big music with layers and layers
  of guitars and voices. Tracks like "7/4 (Shoreline)" show how indie-rock could
  work simultaneously as innovative art-rock and easy to enjoy pop. [*Memory*:
  In late 2005 Sirius Satellite Radio would start broadcasting Canadian content,
  including an indie focussed station called "The Verge". This was one of many
  records I discovered there.]

- *Aerial* by **Kate Bush** - I actively resisted this album (and artist) for
  years. This record was massive at the time, particularly with the NPR Music
  set. While I would learn to appreciate her early work in the 2010s, I didn't
  connect with this later album until pandemic times. This is an art rock album
  that is so timeless, it would be impossible to place in any kind of era. More
  of a return to the experimental sounds of her 3rd and 4th records, this leaves
  behind much of the pop accessability of her late 80s peak. I can't think of
  anything more **Kate Bush** than singing the digits of Pi on the song of that
  name. [*Memory*: For several months this was my album of choice, during my
  morning walks in the middle of the COVID19 pandemic. This music has a sense of
  isolation, with a soothing warmth that went well with the mood of that time.]

- *Plans* by **Death Cab For Cutie** - A terrific followup to a massive indie
  success, and a major label debut. The first of many acts who would make this
  transition, and one of the most successful. The production is a  bit sharper,
  but otherwise this fits in well with their earlier work. These are all pretty
  much ballads now, but they have always been their best at their most sappy. I
  lost interest after this record. [*Memory*: One of the positive side effects
  of these guys going to a major was that I could get this at Columbia House
  prices. One of the last discs I would acquire that way.]

- *Picaresque* by **The Decemberists** - This will always be the peak for me.
  The perfect balance of their folky early stuff, and the later more
  progressive, conceptual work. So many whimsical story songs about mariners,
  bagmen, and barrow boys, I don't know that anything else captures the wilful
  dorkiness of 2000s indie rock. I love it. [*Memory*: This song seemed to
  produce an unusually high number of "hit singles". Indie music was everywhere
  in those days, and every song that escaped the limited visibility of college
  radio playlists was a winner. I knew about 5 songs already when I heard "16
  Miliary Wives" on one of those music choice cable channels at a friends dinner
  party. Somehow that was what sold me on these guys.]

- *Green Cosmos* by **Deerhoof** - I think the two releases from this band would
  highlight the two major threads of their sound. This one is maybe the most
  whimsical thing they have produced. A particular kind of childlike weirdness
  runs throughout the album. I mean it starts with a song that commands us to
  "Come See The Duck"! The album is also mostly in Satomi's native Japanese. It
  is filled with keyboard riffs that make the **Fiery Furnaces** look tame by
  comparison. [*Memory*: I don't think I ever heard this before I bought the
  vinyl reissue of it at Lakeshore Record Exchange on my first Record Store Day
  in 2010.] 

- *The Runners Four* by **Deerhoof** - One of the hardest rocking albums they
  have ever made, yet there is always a undercurrent of gentle pop. This one
  always has been a bit too long for me, but the highlights are very high.
  "O'Malley, Former Underdog" is a particular favorite. [*Memory*: At the time,
  eMusic was pricing albums per track. I remember this double album with all the
  short songs feeling a bit spendy under that model, and I put it off for quite
  a while.]

- *Some Cities* by **Doves** - These guys were probably the most consistent act
  to come out of the UK indie scene of the early 2000s. Not quite as good as
  what came immediately before, but still a fine rock record. **Radiohead** had
  brought synths and samples into alt-rock and bands like this took the idea to
  wildly popular places. Like **Coldplay** but actually good. [*Memory*: I had
  been interested in this band for some time due to satellite radio, but had
  never checked out their stuff due to a lack of funds. With funds from my first
  full-time job I was finally able to get their entire back-catalog in 2005,
  when this was the latest release.]

- *Blinking Lights and Other Revelations* by **Eels** - This record felt so huge
  when it came out, but going on two decades later, it has almost completely
  disappeared from public consciousness. It is a very subtle record of subdued
  and very pretty songs that can be easy to forget. It is incredibly enjoyable
  every time I do listen to it. A wide mixture of styles from late 90s style
  alt-rock to piano based ballads, this is a sprawling double album in the
  traditions of the late 60s. [*Memory*: This may be the album I have been
  looking for on vinyl for the longest time. Some day I might just have to pull
  the trigger on one of the expensive copies on discogs.]

- *Room Noises* by **Eisley** - A bunch of weird kids from Texas making major
  key **Radiohead** songs. The three sisters at the center of the group had a
  remarkable combination of voices. This first record has a quaint kind of
  childlike wonder that is really enjoyable. [*Memory*: I was on-board early as
  their early EPs (particularly *Marvelous Things*) got serious play on Sirius
  Left of Center in the summer of 2004. I even used some free download codes I
  saved up from a McDonald's promotion to download that EP from iTunes.]

- *You Could Have it So Much Better* by **Franz Ferdinand** - At the time I was
  a little disappointed that this was so much like their first record, but given
  the change in direction that would come after this, I'm now glad we got one
  more in this style. In many ways the ultimate realization of the post-punk
  revival sound, this could also be seen as the peak of UK Indie. "Walk Away" is
  one of my very favorite songs. [*Memory*: When I was being on-boarded at my
  new job, I saw a CD copy of this on the corner of one of my new colleague's
  desk. It was a good sign.]

- *Demon Days* by **Gorillaz** - While this was certainly the most popular
  project by **Damon Albarn** in the USA, it is far less interesting to me than
  his other projects. That said, this album does more for me than the others
  under this name. I think I am mostly drawn to the minimalist electronic beats
  that point forward to the sound of **The Good, The Bad, and the Queen**.
  [*Memory*: I probably wouldn't have given this a chance except for a
  recommendation that a good friend made during a conversation on AOL Instant
  Messenger. I can't think of a more early 2000s way to hear about a record.]

- *Fires In Distant Buildings* by **Gravenhurst** - A really pretty and somber
  record. An early 2000s take on the slowcore genre with some occasional uptempo
  tracks for contrast. Incredibly beautiful but sad. [*Memory*: I had been
  interested in slowcore for several years, and in late 2005 I had access to the
  early Pandora with its Music Genome Project to explore the genre further. I
  think I found out about this record via a **Red House Painters** seeded
  channel that played the **Kinks** cover "See My Friends".]

- *Employment* by **The Kaiser Chiefs** - It is easy to see these guys as a
  follow-on act to the **Franz Ferdinand** sound, but there are some old time
  rock and roll elements here that give a very different feel. I think how much
  a person is going to enjoy this record is dependent on how they feel about "la
  la la la" style singalong choruses. Leeds UK definitely had a sound in the
  mid-aughts and it pretty much was being drunk in the pub and screaming along
  with the jukebox. [*Memory*: I wish I could remember the sequence of events
  that led me to these guys. I know I saw them at Live 8. I drove through the
  night with one of my co-workers to arrive at the fundraiser concert in
  Philadelphia, and they were the first band on, shortly after noon. The singles
  off of this were certainly getting some serious play on Sirius. I also know
  that I had to import this record before it was commonly available in the USA.
  I just can't remember what order these things happened in.]

- *Not Them, You* by **Lake Trout** - A fusion of post-punk, shoegaze, and
  **Radiohead** style art-rock, it is hard to believe they started out a jazzy
  jam band. In many ways the most representative record of the early 2000s on
  this list, but also one of the most obscure. "Shiny Wrapper" is a stunning
  opener, and the record manages to keep the level high throughout. [*Memory*: I
  found out about these guys when their prior album was shared by a friend at a
  former job, during a CDR exchange. I really miss finding out about new music
  from friends, that never happens anymore as a fully grown adult.]

- *LCD Soundsystem* by **LCD Soundsystem** - The genesis of "indie dance music" and a
  record that both seems more and less important than we thought at the time. I
  don't know that this band was ever the game changer the press made them out to
  be, yet this record definitely showed a generation of Brooklyn bands that the
  indie kids, they want to dance. [*Memory*: One of the first really big buzz
  records from the indie era. The single "Losing My Edge" and copious blog hype
  had set this up for a new kind of indie fame. It was kind of weird for a
  relatively unknown band to launch their first album with a companion disc of
  bonus content.]

- *Frances the Mute* by **The Mars Volta** - Another terrific modern day prog
  record from these guys. Everything from the cover, to the song-titles feels
  like a reverential throwback to acts like **Rush** and **Pink Floyd**, but
  the sound is very much rooted in post-hardcore. [*Memory*: It is hard to
  remember now, but there was a time when the RateYourMusic charts were
  dominated by various neo prog outfits. These guys continue to rank high, and I
  think it is because the kind of post-hardcore this is derived from is still
  valued as RYM becomes more concerned with what is "cool".]

- *Chaos and Creation in the Backyard* - A contemporary review of this album
  made the apt observation that the last several records that he had made
  (starting with at least *Flaming Pie*) had been perceived as comeback albums.
  That said, this is where things seemed to stick and he was considered a
  relevant active artist in a way that continues until when I write this (2022).
  I think maybe this is where Paul first realized the direct connections between
  the eccentric pop music he had been making for decades and what the indie kids
  were up to. This album is clearly aware of the connections, and as a result it
  feels of the moment in a way that is remarkable for someone at this point in
  their career. [*Memory*: Paul had always been my favorite Beatle. Suddenly
  after the release of this record, that was no longer uncool.]

- *Live it Out* by **Metric** - I've always preferred the solo stuff by **Emily
  Haines** but there is a lot to like here in the finely produced indie-rock of
  her band. I do miss the edge that these earlier records have, but I'm not
  going to fault them for pursuing the mainstream fame that their increasingly
  slick sound would bring in the years ahead. [*Memory*: One of the first CDs I
  remember buying from Mike's Movies and Music in State College, and one of my
  first discoveries from Sirius 97 The Verge.]

- *Cathedrals* by **Millbrook** - When I think of this EP I realize there must
  be thousands, if not tens of thousands of records I would love, but I will
  never hear. This super obscure record is the perfect combination of Beatles
  pop and early 2000s indie, and I wish there was lots more of this. [*Memory*:
  I discovered this, like I'm sure 99% of the others who know about it, when it
  was featured on NPR All Songs Considered. This was the first time they broke
  something completely obscure, that owes its limited space in the popular
  consciousness to that 30 second segment in a popular weekly podcast.]

- *Z* by **My Morning Jacket** - Alt country was in decline by 2005, and these
  guys were one of the last big names before the genre would become
  unfashionable. This record is already a half step towards the straight ahead
  indie-rock that they, and many of their peers would pivot to in the years
  ahead. The result is their finest work. [*Memory*: NPR All Songs Considered
  was becoming embarrassingly influential on my tastes around this time. I was
  already a big fan of their song "Dancefloors" which was a favorite from my
  early days listening to satellite radio. Hearing "Off the Record" on that NPR
  podcast was what really got me into these guys for a bit.]

- *The Weight is a Gift* by **Nada Surf** - One of the great records that came
  out in the early 2000s from a 90s indie band joining in with the new kids.
  Really great pop songs with jangly guitars. [*Memory*: I found out about these
  guys when I heard the song "Always Love" on the Liquid Todd show on Sirius Alt
  Nation. The show was on at 10 PM to Midnight Saturday night, and was an
  interesting combination of electronic music and indie rock that was very to my
  tastes. I found out about a lot of great things there.]

- *Twin Cinema* by **The New Pornographers** - This was my point of entry for
  this band. In many ways it does the best way of capturing what makes them
  great. The sharp pop songs, the sweet ballads, the wonderful harmonies. More
  than anything it does a great job highlighting the strengths of the three main
  contributors to the songwriting. [*Memory*: This reminds me of the first
  apartment I had after my new job, my first without a roommate. I listened to
  this disc all the time using my home theater DVD player (as was the custom at
  the time).]

- *Deadwing* by **Porcupine Tree** - A return to more proggy sounds after a few
  albums of alt rock, and the most recent album which was on the gentle side of
  metal. That said there are still some hints of the lighter alt mid-tempo alt
  rock in "Lazarus" and the heavier sounds in "Shallow". In many ways this is a
  great summary of why these guys are one of my favorite bands of the last 25
  years. [*Memory*: At the time, this was my favorite album of the year. I tend
  to underestimate how I feel about this one, I really still love it. In fact I
  imported a vinyl copy as I wrote this paragraph. It joins my CD copy, which I
  clearly remember as the first new album I bought after getting my first real
  job in late April 2005. It was great to not feel completely broke anymore.]

- *Work* by **Sound Team** - Another case where a band's first EP is by far
  their finest moment. The rough around the edges post-punk on offer here is far
  more interesting than what would come on their debut LP. "The Fastest Man
  Alive" is still their best song. More post-punk revival bands should have
  featured the organ like these guys and **The Walkmen**. [*Memory*: I bought my
  CD copy of this after seeing them open for **Death Cab for Cutie** at the
  Bryce Jordan Center on the Penn State Campus. I'm glad I did, as this is way
  out of print now.]

- *Gimme Fiction* by **Spoon** - The last of their early albums, and the last
  one with their trademark minimalist sound. Still the ultimate realization of
  piano forward indie rock, with some create guitar accents. Not their most
  consistent record, but still a great listen [*Memory*: The song that led me to
  these guys was "I Turn My Camera On", which I heard on Sirius and immediately
  sought out the record. Interestingly the Krautrock groove that pulled me in is
  not very representative of their other work, which I ended up liking as well.]

- *Illinois* by **Sufjan Stevens** [**2005 Favorite**] - The fanciest folk
  record ever made. Some incredible songs came out of the state based theme, and
  the range of instrumentation and styles is staggering. The band that he
  assembled for this record is something else, and many, many of these folks are
  off doing great things in various projects across the rock and classical
  worlds. It is hard to see this as anything other  than than 2000s indie's
  greatest moment. [*Memory*: This is another highly rated record that I
  resisted for a while because of all the hype. It was the heartbreaking
  "Casimir Pulaski Day" that changed my mind. That story of a deeply religious
  young person questioning their faith after seeing their first love die of
  cancer is one of the very best songs of all time. This album was also highly
  influential in my tastes going forward. I always saw myself a a rock guy, but
  this got me on board with the lighter side of indie.]

- *The Loon* by **Tapes 'n Tapes** - Another band that took the indie post-punk
  revival sound and added some additional, interesting elements. These guys like
  to mess with rhythm, and use heavy distortion on the guitars and vocals in a
  way that isn't psychedelic but edgy. All their work has been very good, but
  this debut is still their top effort. [*Memory*: I always assumed these guys
  were Canadian, given their sound, and they even made a song called "Manitoba".
  Turns out they are from Minnesota. Close enough I guess.]

- *Team Sleep* by **Team Sleep** - Such a cool record. It uses electronics,
  samples, and atmosphere to turn millennial alt-rock into something way more
  interesting. Way better than the primary related band, **Deftones**, I wish
  they made more music for this wonderful side project. Every time I play this
  record, I'm struck by how interesting and enjoyable it is. [*Memory*: This is
  the only time in my life I discovered an album by one of the most cliche ways
  out there. I walked into the State College FYE at the old Nittany Mall, and
  heard this playing in the background. I went up to the counter and asked what
  it was, and they pointed to the jewel case on the counter. I walked out with
  this disc.]

- *Apologies to the Queen Mary* by **Wolf Parade** - This is another of the
  indie bands out of the post-punk revival set who would make progressively more
  complex and diverse music as their albums progress. I much prefer the earlier
  simpler stuff. Admittedly, they started out with some wonderfully eccentric
  pop elements, but it was just enough on this one. [*Memory*: This was one of
  the first records that really directed my attention to the "Canadian
  Renaissance" already in progress. Thanks to Sirius The Verge I was hearing
  this stuff very early. This was the point where it started to feel like only
  our northern neighbors could still make good guitar based indie rock like
  this.]

2006
----

When I look at the picture below I'm struck by how many different ways I
discovered these records. Some of these were the latest releases from acts I had
been following for some time, but mostly they were completely new things. There
are songs I heard on Sirius or XM satellite radio. There are things that were
the hot albums on the indie music blogs of the day. There were small indie
releases that were recommended by eMusic. There are 3 (!) albums that I
discovered watching a UK music countdown show, repackaged as cheap filler
content on the obscure US Cable network, HDNet. There is a album with a track I
heard on a iMac commercial. Some of these were the top records on RateYourMusic,
back when tastes were a little different there (more indie and mainstream). I
was still using the AllMusic guide to do genre studies (in this case post-rock).
There is an album I ran out and bought on the drive home from the local brewpub,
where I heard it playing in the background.

This is also the year where I have by far the most releases that I would like
to own on vinyl that I do not. In many cases, these records never saw a vinyl
release, and are obscure enough that one is not likely to ever happen. As a
result, there is quite the unsightly stack-up of CDs on the side of the image.
This almost encapsulates the unsightliness of the CD as a format. The art is too
small to be appreciated, and no matter how well you tried to take care of those
jewel cases they are scratched up and a little cracked. Many of those discs were
bought at City Lights Records, where I had started to shop when my old favorite
store, Mike's Movies and Music had closed. Many came from Amazon, in some cases
imported from the UK (a new practice that I had adopted). One of these CDs, was
imported from the UK by myself personally!

More than anything I'm looking at the image below and feeling powerful waves of
nostalgia. This was the music of my younger self. A person I can relate to, but
no longer completely am. I glad that I can always revisit my former self though
these albums.

.. image:: images/2006.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2006 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/4jmNhlF28Q5SmCzP1Eq5yA?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" 
  allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen;
  picture-in-picture"></iframe>
  
- *Beach House* by **Beach House** - Listening to this is quite startling
  knowing the band they are today. This is a much smaller, slower, and
  meandering record than what they do now. This slight record was certainly
  enough to get me interested back then, and I still really like it today.
  [*Memory*: I found out about these guys as an eMusic recommended artist. I
  remember Greg at city lights being impressed how ahead of the scene I was that
  time. I also remember buying my vinyl copy at Amoeba records in San Francisco
  in 2009 and being surprised that they were making vinyl reissues of relatively
  recent indie records.]

- *The Life Pursuit* by **Belle and Sebastian** - It is hard to remember now,
  but this was a controversial record when it came out. The transition to
  straight ahead pop they had started on their previous record was now complete.
  Everyone missed the half-folk and chamber elements, and it was widely regarded
  as sub-par. I really enjoyed these back to basics pop songs back then, and
  now consider this their finest record. This was also the album when Stevie
  Jackson and Sarah Martin really started to play a larger, and quite welcome
  role in the band. The mix of the three primary vocalists had become the
  signature sound of the band. It was almost like they had become a more twee
  and gentle **New Pornographers**.

- *Let's Get Out Of This Country* by **Camera Obscura** - The Scots understand
  indie pop like no other nation on earth. This might be the finest record in
  the whole genre. Back when hit indie records were a thing, this was one of the
  biggest. Everywhere from Pitchfork, Stereogum, NPR Music, and Spin wanted you
  to listen to this thing. Every service recommended it as a download, and it
  climbed the RateYourMusic charts in a way music like this can't anymore. Holds
  up. [*Memory*: This was the first real concert I attended in Rochester, NY. I
  remember walking down the German house in 2009, and being excited that I could
  see bands like this in the town I lived in. This would be the beginning of
  three great years of shows.]

- *The Crane Wife* by **The Decemberists** - This was the start of a new phase
  for a band that always liked drama, but now were completely centered on
  telling grand stories. A little preview of the proggyness that would fully
  form on the next one, this was still mostly the indie-folk of the first three
  records. This whole record tells a story that I've never been able to follow,
  but it doesn't matter because the songs are so strong. A great guest spot by
  **Laura Veirs** on "Yankee Bayonet" as well. [*Memory*: I remember this being
  voted the top album of 2006 by NPR listeners and feeling a little bit old that
  my tastes aligned with that group. It isn't my favorite from the year any
  longer, but it is close!]

- *Victory of the Comic Muse* by **The Divine Comedy** - After a couple more
  serious records, Neil Hannon allows himself a little levity again. One of the
  very last of his records for me to warm up to, it joins the rest of the
  catalog as a favorite. He is probably the most consistent artist I know of.
  [*Memory*: I think I had only heard this once or twice before buying the
  entire vinyl reissue series.]

- *The Bright Lights and What I Should Have Learned* by **Duels** - A late entry
  in the UK indie scene, it is a mostly guitar based Brit-pop derivative sound
  with a sprinkling of the keyboards the USA kids were getting into. I think it
  was because this sat uncomfortably between UK indie and the contemporary
  mainstream sound that this didn't really find an audience despite being a
  really crisply put together record with some interesting sounds. Weirdly, this
  sounds a bit like the kind of "mindie" music that was about to become very
  widely popular in the USA. [*Memory*: I found out about these guys by watching
  "London Live" a repackaging of a UK countdown show that was filler material
  for an early HDTV channel called HDNet. The performance of  the song "Animal"
  had an really fresh, dance-able sound that seemed to anticipate what was about
  to come in North American Indie.]

- *Tuesday Wonderland* by **Esbjorn Svensson Trio** - In the 2000s jazz
  experienced a new kind of fusion, this time with indie and experimental rock
  music. These guys made several of the most important records in the movement.
  The startling **Radiohead**-esque "Fading Maid Preludium/Postludium" bookends
  a set of music that is only slightly more in line with conventional Piano
  jazz. The releases after this would get a little too difficult for me, and
  this is the one where the balance between artistry and accessability was most
  to my liking. [*Memory*: I was spending so much time looking for music, that a
  fairly obscure record like this one was coming at me from multiple angles. A
  featured album by NPR music, I was also hearing this on the Beyond Jazz
  channel on XM radio. I think one of the reasons I like my favorites so much
  from this era, is that I really picked them from a large number of things I
  had heard.]

- *S/T* by **Electric President** - One of the records that followed on from the
  gentle indie-electronic sound of **The Postal Service**, but this one was much
  slower and more somber. I also like how these guys played around with song
  structure, there are bridges and unexpected transitions everywhere. This was
  really interesting stuff that never found the audience it deserved. [*Memory*:
  I had been a subscriber to Sirius Satellite radio since the summer of 2003,
  and it had become a primary influence on my listening. I had always heard that
  XM had a much wider playlist, but didn't really have a full appreciation until
  I heard some XM jazz programming during an Orange Bowl trip in early 2006. I
  immediately subscribed upon my return, and "Good Morning, Hypocrite" from this
  record was one of the first tracks I heard on their indie station, XMU. I can
  almost still picture that song title in the saved track list on my portable
  XM receiver sitting on the dash of my old Purple Dodge Neon. I miss the old
  XM.]

- *Bitter Tea* by the **Fiery Furnaces** - This is one of those records where I
  never understood the prevailing opinion. Somehow this is perceived to be the
  impenetrably difficult and dense follow-up. If anything this takes the
  experimentation and proggy-ness of **Blueberry Boat** and adds back in the
  strong pop component of the early stuff. Things like "Waiting to Know You" do
  an amazing job balancing the weirdness with the sweetness. I like this record
  way more than 95% of the human population. [*Memory*: This was the time when
  you could buy an unpopular record on vinyl at a steep discount. I don't know
  if I even paid 10 bucks for a nice new copy of this.]

- *Just Like the Fambly Cat* by **Grandaddy** - It took me a while, but I came
  to appreciate the last record from the first tenure of these guys. Some
  serious punk aggression (especially on the hardcore homage "50%") has been
  added to the usual low-key, often downtrodden psych-pop. This would have been
  a great statement to end on, and I haven't liked what has come since nearly as
  much. [*Memory*: I listened to this a lot on headphones around the time I
  lived in my little Park Ave apartment. I still like to crank it through cans
  every now and then. The fuzz sounds great that way.]

- *Yellow House* by **Grizzly Bear** - I didn't like this very much when it
  first came out to great acclaim. I connected much more with the next record,
  which featured far more conventional songs. I think after I had that blueprint
  to follow, I could better appreciate this more abstract work. [*Memory*: This
  was strangely difficult to hear for a massive indie hit. It wasn't on eMusic,
  and I don't recall ever seeing the CD appear at City Lights (or Best Buy). It
  was also out of print on vinyl for a shockingly long time, until I got the
  re-issue that came out in 2022.]

- *Knives Don't Have Your Back* by **Emily Haines** - [**2006 FAVORITE**] - A
  stunning piano based singer-songwriter record, that is completely unlike
  anything else I have ever heard. I really think she saves her very best stuff
  for the rare solo releases, and this outclasses anything from **Metric** by a
  fair margin. The production on this record is quite exceptional as well, and
  the dreamy mix really adds a lot to the impact of the top notch lyrics.
  [*Memory*: I became aware of this album via a post of the excellent video for
  "Doctor Blind" on Pitchfork. The artist is strolling through an empty
  department store in a creepy scene that really complements a fairly profound
  song about the over-prescription of anti-depressants.]

- *The Day I Turned to Glass* by **Honeycut** - A delightful anomaly: hip hop
  influenced indie rock made by a classically trained cellist. I don't think
  this ever found its audience, and I'm not sure it really has much of one. I
  really like it though. Listening today, it sounds a bit ahead of it's time and
  it fits in well with what is going on in the frontier of R&B. [*Memory* I
  discovered this ]

- *Howling Bells* by **Howling Bells** - I had been enjoying this record for the
  better part of a year when someone pointed out to me that it is a bit of a
  country record. They were right. It is dark kind of country made by
  Australians, but country nonetheless. This was back when the Bella Union label
  seemed like it was trending towards some sort of modern day 4AD, and this fits
  right in with that. "Setting Sun" is one of my favorite songs of all time.
  [*Memory*: I really struggled to acquire this record. This was another band I
  discovered on HDNet's "London Live" show. Their performance was a little
  rough, but I liked it enough to DVR it and watch it over and over again. I
  remember waiting for a 2007 US release that didn't happen, and I couldn't find
  a way to import the disc from the UK on Amazon. Eventually I would buy a copy
  from HMV on my first trip to london in March 2007 and hand carry it back to
  the USA myself.]

- *Return to Sea* by **Islands** - I like this even more than the much loved
  **Unicorns** LP, as the more serious tone does it for me. Plenty of whimsey
  still here, but the epic indie-pop of "Swans (Life After Death)" was a welcome
  expansion of the wounds used by that prior band. Even "Rough Gem" manages to
  be silly in a far more epic way. This is big indie-pop. [*Memory*: Another XMU
  discovery, the expanded playlist of my new satellite radio service was
  expanding my music collection.]

- *Silent Shout* by **The Knife** - The kind of music only Scandinavians can
  make properly. Creepy atmospheric, yet highly melodic and certainly not the
  least bit danceable. This is the electronic music of calm reflection in a dark
  room. [*Memory*: This was the first time I can remember resisting a Pitchfork
  hype record out of principle. When I finally relented, it was very clearly an
  amazing record.]

- *Everything Wrong is Imaginary* by **Lilys** - The Elephant6 adjacent band
  from Philly ends on a very high note. The superior of the two records to come
  out of their third phase. The sharply produced shoegazy indie-pop on offer
  puts to shame the myriad of new bands working in this territory at the time.
  [*Memory*: After this record came out I assumed it was the start of a glorious
  comeback for this guy. I didn't realize it was the end.]

- *Someone to Drive You Home* by **The Long Blondes** - Very derivative of the
  long history of post-punk and new wave, but the execution is perfect. In
  retrospect this can almost be seen as the period on the post-punk revival.
  This is where the new wave revival and imaginary 80s began. [*Memory*: I have
  always been unable to process exactly how much I like this record for some
  reason. When it was getting good press back in '06 I was so resistant to it.
  When I reviewed my candidates when making this list, I was tempted to leave it
  off. After half a listen I was rushing off to find a vinyl copy on discogs.]

- *Pretty Little Head* by **Nellie Mckay** - Another double album genre
  experiment, this time on an indie label, where this belongs. Less white girl
  rapping, and what remains is well done. The genres here are more looking back
  on Broadway and cabaret music, with some alt rock thrown in. [*Memory*: One of
  the first records I remember buying on eMusic. It was very surprising to see
  her on an indie, though it certainly made far more sense than this kind of
  thing being on Columbia. I had started using the eMusic platform in 2006 and
  its subscription based buffet was becoming very influential in my tastes.]

- *You Are There* by **Mono** - Post-rock was a very tired scene by 2006, and
  these guys were one of the last great bands to emerge. Somewhere between the
  shimmering guitars of **Explosions in the Sky** and the chaotic strings of
  **Godspeed You! Great Emperor** maybe the last listenable combination of
  elements left to cover. Their finest record, with their definitive track
  "Moonlight". [*Memory*: This album, and particularly the track "Moonlight" was
  one of the great rediscoveries while making this list. I streamed it during a
  morning walk during a review of the albums on the bubble for the year. I
  probably streamed it half a dozen more times that day.]

- *Black Holes and Other Revelations* by **Muse** - This was the record that
  would finally break these guys in America, more due to better promotion than
  any shift in sound or quality. Still very big alt-rock music, with perhaps a
  bit more of the **Queen** style theatrics. The hit "Supermassive Back Hole"
  introduces a funky kind of groove that would hit at the broader template that
  would be used in the next few records. Looking back, this probably was the
  peak of their first era, and it makes me a little sad since I don't like their
  new direction quite as much. [*Memory*: Another time when I got to feel a bit
  ahead of my time thanks to the expanded playlist of satellite radio.]

- *Bring Me the Workhorse* by **My Brightest Diamond** - I became aware of Shara
  Nova through her work with **Sufjan Stevens** and **The Decemberists**, which
  led me to her solo catalog. Her debut is a subdued, and often moody record. At
  times it feels like a gentler, more classically trained **PJ Harvey** album.
  I don't listen to this as much as her later work, but it is still a great one.
  [*Memory*: In the early days of my vinyl collecting, I could still buy back
  stock first pressings of records that weren't big sellers. That is how I got
  this one around 2010.]

- *He Poos Clouds* by **Owen Pallett** - I became aware of this record on the
  Pitchfork best of 2006 list, so I gave it a download on eMusic. They compared
  it to **Andrew Bird**, but aside from the violin, I don't know why. This is
  some very out there, art-rock that is heavily influenced by contemporary
  classical music. I liked bits of it at the time, I love it now. A complex and
  difficult album, and a first class performance and recording. [*Memory*: This
  along with **Shara Nova** was my gateway into contemporary classical. It was
  very sneaky how they got me to accept the complex sounds by wrapping it in pop
  songs.]

- *Writer's Block* by **Peter, Bjorn, and John** - "Hey Google, play the hipster
  whistling song." This was the first time that an indie artist made a song that
  felt like it was designed for commercials. This was the genesis of mainstream
  indie (or mindie as Carles liked to call it). That does nothing to tarnish an
  outstanding indie pop record, and really it only helped to elevate the status,
  and increase the production of great indie-pop records. [*Memory*: I heard
  (the now legendary) "Young Folks" for the first time when it was playing in
  the background of Otto's Pub and Brewery, my hangout at the time. I stopped at
  Best Buy on the way home, hoping to find a CD copy. I came home with what
  would become one of my favorite records of the year.]

- *We Are the Pipettes* by **The Pipettes** - In the mid 2000s, there were
  constantly new genres of indie that were going to be the next big thing, but
  produced a few big records before fading away. "Pre-Beatles pop-music" was
  such an animal, and the 60s girl groups were an obvious place find
  inspiration. In retrospect this does seem like the kind of gimmick that
  wouldn't last long, but what a glorious debut record. They sing in an
  untrained but pure tone that sounds great together. The pop songwriting is
  great, especially on the classic "Pull Shapes". [*Memory*: Yet another band
  that I discovered on HDNet London Live. It was such a surprise to see such an
  out there concept get any attention at all. I remember having Greg at City
  Lights order me a copy of their first US EP, and him asking me "so is this
  like a 60s girl group or something?" Kinda, but not exactly in a way that
  really, really worked for a short time.]

- *Operation: Mindcrime II* by **Queensryche** - What a huge surprise. A sequel
  to one of my favorite albums of all time arrived, and it was far better than I
  could have imagined. A remarkable return to the classic sound of this band, we
  now know it mostly a Geoff Tate solo album. It would have been impossible to
  achieve the same high level of the original, but this is about 75% the
  quality, which is still very, very good. More than anything it takes the story
  to a new place, that somehow makes the first record more interesting from a
  narrative perspective. [*Memory*: I hadn't thought much about these guys in
  years when I heard that this was coming out. Thanks to this record I would
  re-engage with their back-catalog and they would become one of my all-time
  favorites.]

- *Classics* by **Ratatat** - Instrumental rock that is very much not post-rock,
  this whimsical record is more like the modern **Ventures**. One of those bands
  where every album is very similar, and I only end up caring about their very
  best effort. [*Memory*: In 2007, I went on a bus tour of the Irish
  countryside north of Dublin. I remember a rich doctor was there with his wife
  and adult son who was wearing a Ratatat shirt. Why do I remember this, I don't
  know. I've got nothing else for here.]

- *Hello Everything* by **Squarepusher** - His records had been expanding to
  include more and more elements, and the title of this one seems to recognize a
  peak had been reached. After this he would bite off a bit more than he could
  chew, but the eclecticism works out well here. The jazz influenced electronica
  of "Planetarium" is a particular favorite, and probably the high point for
  this guy. [*Memory*: I found out about this artist on XM Beyond Jazz, where I
  heard "Modern Jazz Guitar". The early XM was a great platform, and while I am
  still a happy customer of the modern SiriusXM, I miss those old stations with
  their edge case genres, and massive, handcrafted playlists.]

- *A Lesson in Crime* by **Tokyo Police Club** - Sometimes a band's first work
  is their best, and in this case it is a 17 minute long EP. The rawness and
  rough edges are a positive here, and it is almost like they ruined themselves
  by started to understand what they were doing. This is pure garage, the sounds
  of kids who don't completely know how to make rock music, but do so pretty
  effectively anyway. The songs are strange and wonderful, particularly the
  charmingly amateurish science fiction of "Citizens of Tomorrow". They would
  never come close to this again. This is my favorite EP of all time. [*Memory*:
  I saw the band play an opening set as "the next big thing" in a packed to the
  gills basement club in Temple Bar Dublin. They played the EP in sequence and
  nothing more. They pulled a girl up from the crowd to sing the one line of
  female vocals from "Nature of the Experiment". A buzz band at their peak, and
  I was glad to be there.]

2007
----

I had a sense that when I got to this year, I would have a bit to say in the
introduction text, but didn't anticipate all the topics that would come to mind.
This was a pivotal year for the music industry, and for me as a listener. These
two things are not coincidental. The MP3 had almost a decade to destroy the model
for pop music that had existed since the late 1960s, and at least initially,
what was left in the ashes was wonderful. By 2007, portable media had made the
MP3 a practical means for music consumption in almost all contexts. In
mainstream music, the single was now again king, but album based rock music was
somehow stronger than ever. Digital distribution had raised awareness of indie
acts that in previous decades would have mostly toiled in obscurity and at best
might have been the favorites of music nerds, and then only retrospectively
be discovered by listeners at large. In this era of music blogs, the obscure could
rapidly become ubiquitous, and attention was getting drawn to increasingly
diverse models of what rock music could be.

The way I was consuming music was changing rapidly, but I clung to the old ways
out of nostalgic stubbornness. Like most people my age I had accumulated a
significant and very not-legit collection of MP3s. Around this time in my life,
I started to assemble a legit recreation and expansion of these illicit files. I
was using an expanded pallette of (legal) means to acquire and curate a rapidly
growing collection. This was the golden age of the subscription/buffet pricing
scheme at eMusic, who for a nominal fee (15-20 dollars a month) could provide a
path to 10 or more indie label releases in digital format. At the time, I had
started to buy my first digital albums from Amazon, but digital was eclipsed by
CDs which were still the main way music was fining its way into my collection. I
would visit City Lights records every Tuesday during my lunch break and leave
with a clutch of the latest releases and likely a bunch of catalog titles I had
special ordered. These were the first crys of "the CD is dead" but I wasn't
listening. I kept detailed records of every release that made it into my
collection regardless of format and I know that the first album I bought
(*Hissing Fauna, Are you the Destroyer?* by **Of Montreal**) was the 900th item
cataloged. A full 372 albums later, the 1272nd record (*Weirdo Rippers* by **No
Age**) would be logged, surely the most music I have ever acquired in a single
calendar year.

Most of the music I was listening to was still from years gone by, but I was
listening to more new music than I had ever done before. I have an interesting
artifact from this time, the first comprehensive attempt I ever made at a best
of the year list as a full grown adult. It isn't the final version (unfortunately
lost to time) but an in progress version that I sent to myself via E-mail. I
remember working on this list during my lunch breaks at work during the last
months of the year, and I was sending it home to complete there over the holiday
break. At this point, I owned and could assess 79 different releases! I know
what I considered to be my top 25 records at that time, and 20 of those still
make my modern list. This is a much higher ratio than what would survive from my
2009 favorites (see below), and I think this is a product of my ability to still
listen with a kind of focus that the copious consumption facilitated by digital
streaming would soon destroy.

One of the five records that appeared on that original list of favorites that
doesn't appear on my modern list feels like a case study in everything mentioned
above. *In Rainbows* by **Radiohead** was the first "pay what you want", DRM
free, digital release by a major, internationally famous rock band. Admittedly,
they were a famous rock band that didn't seem very interested in being famous.
At the time I have no doubt that I included it on my list because I thought that
it was an important release, and 15 years later, I am convinced that it is one
of the most important releases there has ever been. That said, it isn't a great
album. Interestingly, as a band that became famous for working in the long form,
it was mostly a miss as a long player. There are some killer singles on there
though, and "Reckoner" is probably my favorite song of all-time from them, and
one of the most beautiful rock songs ever made. It is hard to view this album
separate from the context in which it was released, and I can't of a better way
to summarize where pop music was in 2007 and my relationship with it.

.. image:: images/2007.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2007 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/54ilAeceSBVelfhppPOXuw?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" 
  allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen;
  picture-in-picture"></iframe>
  
- *Pocket Symphony* by **Air** - A colder more somber record from these guys
  that fits in very well with their other work. It is happy to sit in the
  background in a way their other records do not. That icy, sterile album cover
  is a perfect summary. [*Memory*: I remember Greg from City Lights Records
  telling me he liked to put this on as he was starting his day in the store.
  That sounds just right to me.]

- *American Doll Posse* by **Tori Amos** - This was the beginning of a Tori
  revival for me, and the start of a revival for the artist. I think playing a
  few "alternate roles" for the concept of this record was freeing, and we got
  something considerably more interesting than what had come immediately before.
  Every album since this one has been a winner. So many different styles on this
  record from the mid-tempo singer-songwriter fare of "Bouncing Off of Clouds"
  to the rocking "Teenage Hustling" to the classic devastating story song
  balladry of "Roosterspur Bridge". [*Memory*: I saw Tori for the first time on
  this tour, when it came to Pittsburgh. It was a halloween show and the crowd
  really took the costume thing very seriously.]

- *New Magnetic Wonder* by **The Apples in Stereo** - I was very into Elephant 6
  at the time and was very interested that one of the original bands was still
  making new music. This was the first of two records in a a very **ELO** style,
  with some weird atonal experiments thrown in. Some stunning pop music, that
  makes me sad that Robert Schnieder has largely retired from performing.
  [*Memory*: At the time I didn't like the shift to **Jeff Lynne** territory,
  but wow do I prefer it to the garage psych of their early records now.]

- *Or Give Me Death* by **Aqueduct** - Even more than the first record, this
  album sounds a bit like what would happen if **Modest Mouse** went full blown
  pop. Some really interesting, intricate songs. I really wish more folks had
  found these guys so they could have made more music. [*Memory*: I saw them as
  an opening act at Water Street, a few years after this record came out. I
  think I was the only one who was familiar with their stuff. Great show.]

- *Neon Bible* by **Arcade Fire** - Until the awful **Everything Now** was
  released, this was my least favorite of their albums. Unlike that mess, I
  still really like this one. It was never going to live up to the incredible
  debut, but there is a lot here to like. I especially enjoy the church organ
  and pomp of "Intervention" and "My Body is a Cage". [*Memory*: I waited a
  really long time to buy this one on vinyl. I'm not sure why, as this is a
  brilliant record that sounds great on the analog format.]

- *Mirrored* by **Battles** - A really cool, percussion forward post-rock album.
  Not quite math rock, but still lots of interesting rhythms. They would never
  make something this interesting again. [*Memory*: This kind of defines the
  line for an album I like, but don't need to own on vinyl. I've considered it
  many times, but really digital is good enough for this. Why, I'm not exactly
  sure.]

- *Flying Club Cup* by **Beirut** - One of those bands, where I like much of
  their music, but love only a few things. This is by far my favorite of their
  records. It is a much stronger statement with solid songwriting throughout. "A
  Sunday Smile" has those nostalgic, highly melodic, feel good vibes that is
  their best sound. [*Memory*: I saw Owen Pallet join them on some of these
  tunes at Pitchfork 2009, and it is the moment you see in the banner above.]

- *..are the Dark Horse* by **The Besnard Lakes** - A really nice low-fi, psych
  record with some cool little **Beach Boys** elements. They would milk this
  formula to good effect for a few more records, but this will always be my
  favorite. "For Agent 13" is my favorite use of shortwave numbers stations in a
  song. [*Memory*: When I started buying vinyl records, this was one of the
  first recent releases I picked up. It was also one of the first records that
  made me realize the shortcomings of vinyl production, when it arrived covered
  in scuffs.]

- *Armchair Apocrypha * by **Andrew Bird** - I know many people consider this
  the inferior follow-up, but I prefer it to anything else in his catalog. I
  think it focusses more on straight ahead indie rock in a way that serves the
  purpose well. The slick use of the looper and strings is still there, but the
  songs are sharper and catchier. That said, this isn't something I am
  revisiting often today. [*Memory*: I saw him on this tour at the State Theater
  in State College, PA. I really enjoyed the show. Only a few years later I saw
  him in Rochester and it was awful. Had the performance changed, or had I?]

- *23* by **Blonde Redhead** - A really nice midpoint between dream-pop and
  straight ahead indie rock. I didn't realize it at the time since I was
  discovering them well into their career, but this is the sound of an "old
  indie" band updating their sound to fit right in with the new scene of the
  moment. [*Memory*: I have to admit, I bought this as much for the striking
  cover as for the solid reviews. Surely one of the last times I picked a record
  that way?]

- *Andorra* by **Caribou** - It doesn't seem like it today, because this kind of
  thing is everywhere now, but this kind of psychedelic, electronic thing was
  very innovative at the time. He would have two great records after this, but
  this was the peak. A great mix of pop and experimentation. [*Memory*: I'm a
  bit ashamed to admit that back in these days I was getting almost anything
  Pitchfork gave BNM to that sounded half wise interesting. The indie stuff was
  all on Emusic, and an album was about 2-3 bucks there. It was worth it to even
  hate listen the thing. This one really worked out.]

- *Friend Opportunity* by **Deerhoof** - My first record of theirs, and still my
  favorite. The perfect mix of the punk aggression and the pop cuteness. The
  definitive early 2000s indie band at their peak. Such complex, unusual music
  that manages to be unbelievably re-listenable. I'll never get sick of this
  record. [*Memory*: This was an amazing time for musical discovery. The tools
  at my disposal to hear new things and rise of indie created a unique situation
  I will never see again. Every couple weeks I was discovering a new favorite
  band like this that already had a half a dozen or so great albums.]

- *Copia* by **Eluvium** - It is hard to make ambient music that really stands
  out. This is gorgeous, and wholely unique. There isn't anything else out there
  with this same kind of warm but vacant vibe. The title of the track "Indoor
  Swimming at the Space Station" really captures the scene well. [*Memory*: I
  was really into the ambient works by Eno at the time and when I saw a modern
  ambient record getting good press, I had to check it out.]

- *Widow City* by **The Fiery Furnaces** - A number of indie pop acts had been
  becoming increasingly weird over the last decade or so, and these guys started
  out the weirdest of them all. This is a lot to digest. The funky keyboards,
  the Zeppelin-esque hard rock guitar, Emily Freidberger's off-kilter delivery
  of her brothers weird poetry, all framed by mostly jaunty piano based pop
  songs. Peak weird suited these guys best of all. [*Memory*: At the time, they
  had been so productive it was easy to assume this would go on indefinitely.
  Little did we know we would get only one more (fairly conservative) effort,
  and the sibling band would go on permanent hiatus.]

- *The Good, The Bad, and the Queen* by **The Good, The Bad, and the Queen** -
  The work of a unusual supergroup that ends up sounding more like the somber,
  non-fiction continuation of its most famous member's former band (Blur). A
  brilliant meditation on the role of England in the 21st century. For almost 10
  years, this was the most valuable record in my collection, and it deserved to
  be so. It is a cult classic of the highest order, and one of my very
  favorites. [*Memory*: In 2007 I took two trips to the UK for business. Both
  times I was able to get up to London to do some tourist stuff. This album
  became the soundtrack to the first trip and I streamed it repeatedly on my
  trusty old iPod nano. On the second trip I saw a special performance of the
  record in the moat of the Tower of London. What a memory I will cherish
  forever!]

- *White Chalk* by **PJ Harvey** - [**2007 FAVORITE**] What a left turn for
  Polly Jean. The guitar is almost gone. The muscular vocals are no more,
  replaced with her "church voice". The aesthetic of this album is remarkable.
  Barely proficient enough to make a piano based record, she finds incredible
  songs in the simple arrangements. The creepy victorian attire she matched to
  this music really completed the scene. Already an all-time great, this is
  where it went to the next level. [*Memory*: I was already going to City Lights
  every Tuesday to pick up the latest releases, but I particularly remember
  rushing out as soon as the store opened that September to pick this one up.]

- *Cross* by **Justice** - While **Daft Punk** generally get all the attention
  these guys made the foremost masterpiece of French Electronic music right
  here. Everything is perfect, from the bombast of "Genesis", through the pure
  joy of "D.A.N.C.E." to the wonderful crassness of **Uffie's** rap on "The
  Party". This might be the best electronic dance music ever made. [*Memory*: I
  used to like to play this during my runs at the time. I remember playing it
  over the stereo system in the work gym one time and being really embarrassed
  when **Uffie** started in on her rap, lol.]

- *Sound of Silver* by **LCD Soundsystem** - It can be hard to remember that
  before EDM ruined things, electronic music was was of the most interesting and
  fertile grounds for new musical ideas. They aren't really doing anything new
  here, but the combination of Krautrock grooves, disco beats, and New Wave
  vocals was the perfect pallette for some great songs. "Someone Great" is a top
  10 all-time track. [*Memory*: I was already sold on these guys from their
  early singles and was right on this album when it was released. I remember
  Greg at City lights being very lukewarm. I remember telling one of the trendy
  interns at work about it, and how meh they were. It eventually became regarded
  as an all time classic. I felt very ahead of the curve.]

- *Night Falls over Kortedala* by **Jens Lekman** - This is a weird case. A
  classic album, that the artist decided to replace with a completely new
  version. I think I still like the original more, since it has a wonderful
  quaintness that isn't quite as strong on the new version. It is a guy trying
  to make the symphonic **Scott Walker** records in his bedroom. The kind of
  pure pop singing that only Scandinavians are allowed to do these days.
  [*Memory*: This was the first year that I reviewed the top albums lists by the
  major sites. This one was very high on the Pitchfork list and I gave it a
  shot.]

- *Memory Almost Full* by **Paul McCarney** - Paul clearly was becoming aware of
  the peaking indie rock scene, and it shows. One of his strongest later year
  efforts, especially the power pop of "Only Mamma Knows" and the eccentric
  vocoder and harpsichord experimental pop of "Feet in the Clouds". [*Memory*:
  I remember listening to this on my Sansa as I waited for my plane from
  Heathrow to Dublin, drinking a Sam Smith Oatmeal Stout right at the gate.]

- *Obligatory Villagers* by **Nellie McKay** - It is weird that her best album
  is almost impossible to hear these days, and I'm glad to have the physical CD
  (I assume there are rights issues). The perfect combination of comical
  commentary and top notch songwriting. This time with an amazing collection of
  jazz musicians to give everything a dramatic cabaret feel. [*Memory*: Soon
  after this album, she did a video with NPR music that documented her
  songwriting process, which was quite remarkable.]

- *Friend and Foe* by **Menomena** - The first shot fired in the "floor tom
  band" scene. This highly percussive brand of melodic indie rock was super
  novel at time, but would be cliche less than a year later. Still a solid
  record, but it is hard to hear it the same way after all the soundalikes. The
  sax does add a little something extra that makes this hold up a bit better
  than the rest. [*Memory*: These guys hold the unique distinction of being a
  band I have seen live, but do not really remember having seen. I saw them in
  Philly in 2010, and remember it as being a good show, but nothing else really.
  At least I have the shirt to prove I was there.]

- *Challengers* by **The New Pornographers** - An outstanding record that both
  shows what a great pop band they are together, but the strengths that the
  three primary songwriters have as individuals. Also some great vocals from new
  member Kathryn Calder, especially "Adventures in Solitude". "My Rights Versus
  Yours" is one of the greatest opening tracks ever. The way it slowly builds to
  introduce the sounds of the record is first rate album sequencing. [*Memory*:
  At first I wasn't so sure about the mellower mood of this record, but I now
  appreciate this as one of their finest efforts.]

- *Boxer* by **The National** - The pivot album between the more punk influenced
  sounds of the first few records, and the mid-tempo alt-rock that would come.
  First rate musicianship throughout, and Matt Berninger's voice is as rich and
  textured as it would ever be. "Mistaken for Strangers" is the finest product
  of their early phase. [*Memory*: I was so resistant to these guys, and refused
  to engage with this record when it was new. All of a sudden when I hit my 30s,
  I liked few bands more.]

- *Hissing Fauna, You Are the Destroyer* by **Of Montreal** - The album where
  his bedroom psych pop went dance. It wasn't as big of a tweak as it sounded at
  the time, but it was apparently the move that made the world appreciate the
  talent that had always been there. [*Memory*: I remember playing this CD in my
  office after a visit to City Lights Records on new music Tuesday. The uptempo
  dance groove was a bit shocking to me as a long time fan, but I was on board
  for the new sounds from the start. I was shocked that the general public was
  too. It was a unique time.]

- *The Stage Names* by **Okkervil River** - This was a straightforward indie
  rock pallette cleanser in one of the most experimental eras. The definition of
  NPR music, it is quaint but not bland, and often quite pretty. "Savannah
  Smiles" is a particular highlight. [*Memory*: I saw these guys in Rochester on
  the next album cycle. It was clear from the setlist that they recognized this
  as their best work.]

- *Ga Ga Ga Ga Ga* by **Spoon** - Indie rock was peaking and new buzz bands were
  emerging every week. Some of the American indie acts that had been at it since
  the late 90s were raising to prominence in a whole new way. This was the
  record where Austin's biggest secret used their heightened influence to make a
  very big, Motown tinged record. It was their highest point. [*Memory*: There
  are two times in my life I had to pull over my car because I heard a new song
  that was too good for me to concentrate. "You Got Yr. Cherry Bomb" was one of
  them.]
  
- *Marry Me* by **St. Vincent** - Far smaller, but no less complex, the contrast
  is stunning with where the artist is now. I miss the sound of this record (and
  the one that came later). Somehow she has gotten way noisier and flashier, yet
  way more boring. These ornate, but subtle home recordings are some of the
  finest songs in indie-pop history. I try to not be one of those people who
  complain about artists selling out for mainstream fame, but I can't see
  anything else here. [*Memory*: I downloaded this record from eMusic based
  purely on their review. I got so much great music off of that site.]

- *In Our Bedroom After the War* by **Stars** - I know the record before this is
  supposed to be the classic (and it is a perfectly fine indie pop record) but
  this will always be my favorite. Such sweet little songs with strong
  melodies and warm vocals. Every now and then they show glimpses of something
  more than pop, like the jazz influenced "My Favorite Book". [*Memory*: One of
  those records I listened to on repeat on my Sansa MP3 player during lunchtime
  walks at work around the East College Ave area.]

- *Random Spirit Lover* by **Sunset Rubdown** - A wonderfully strange record.
  Low budget indie-prog made by an artist who had won fame making straight ahead
  indie rock with his other band **Wolf Parade**. I assume that connection was
  the only reason the general music press even cared about this, but I'm glad it
  was brought to my attention. You get the impression that the musicians being
  stretched way beyond their ability, but what they produced ended up amazing
  anyway. "Stallion" is so over the top and outrageously good. [*Memory*: When I
  started buying Vinyl LPs, this was one of the first things I sought out. This
  is meant for physical media.]

- *All Hour Cymbals* by **Yeasayer** - **Menomena** were first, but this was the
  record that broke the sound. One of those discs that would spawn a million
  imitators, this kind of percussive, dance-able indie-pop would be pervasive
  over the next half decade. While this band would soon move on to other
  things, they leave behind one of the finest and most interesting entries in
  the sub-genre. [*Memory*: I distinctly remember listening to this for the
  first time waiting for an early AM flight at the State College, PA airport.]

2008
----

When I look at my favorites I am struck by two things. First, almost the entire
list is comprised of fairly new (at the time) indie acts, with only two "legacy"
artists in **Portishead** and **Steven Wilson** (who was himself a newly minted
solo artist after the end of **Porcupine Tree**). The second thing I notice is
how almost all of these were discovered as they came out and represent what I
was actually listening to in 2008. Only the **Metronomy** and **William
Brittelle** records were retrospective discoveries, and only by a year or two
each. It almost seems like this is the most aligned I would be with what was hot
and "now". This year also has the distinction of being the year that I bought a
turntable and started buying vinyl records (in November). It was here that I
started the practice of buying my favorites on vinyl. Without streaming, new
discoveries were often still made on CD, so I own no less than 11 of the albums
below on both vinyl and CD. If it wasn't on eMusic, I was often getting new
music on the small discs and making the upgrade when something became a
favorite.

.. image:: images/2008.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2008 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px" 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/1kaeZR79MxCVk3u5szQcPY?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; 
  fullscreen; picture-in-picture"></iframe>

- *Devotion* by **Beach House** - The second (and final) record in their
  original sound before moving to far bigger and more popular sonic territory. I
  do prefer what they would become, but there is a lot to love on these much
  smaller, and more acoustic early songs. They would keep going upwards from
  here, but they were always great. [*Memory*: I saw them on this album cycle
  playing a twin headline show with **The Walkmen** at the TLA in Philadelphia.
  I had a nice chat with Vicky Legrand at the merch booth and shared the memory
  of their issues at their first London show in 2007. She smiled and almost
  yelled: "You saw the worst show ever!" I bought of copy the "Used to Be"
  single as a 45 and when I got home from the 3 hour drive, I listened to the
  sound of what was to come.]

- *William Brittelle* by **Mohair Timewarp** - My point of entry would be his
  concept 2010 concept album, but I would circle back to this weird art rock
  record not long after. A very strange album with extremely strange lyrics. I
  really wish New Amsterdam was releasing music like this. [*Memory*: This
  might end up being the last CD I ever buy. I realized it was one of the few
  albums I didn't own in any format and it wasn't streaming. So I bought a CD
  copy in early 2022.]

- *Half Hours with the Lower Creatures* by **Rachel Taylor Brown** - I'm fairly
  certain 99% of the folks who know about this artist, were introduced via the
  appearance of "Stagg Field" on NPR's "All Songs Considered". I'm not a huge
  fan of the show, but I really have to credit those guys for shining a light on
  some very non-commercial music by an obscure artist who would otherwise get no
  attention. A terrific art rock album. [*Memory*: After hearing this amazing
  record and the follow up in 2009 that I liked even more, I ordered her entire
  back catalog from CD Baby. The rest wasn't that great.]

- *In Ghost Colours* by **Cut Copy** - There were a bunch of bands that were
  making music that referenced an imaginary version of the 80s that never really
  existed, and then there were these guys. This is a wonderful modernization of
  **New Order** or **OMD** for the home recording era. [*Memory*: I totally held
  a vinyl copy of this in my hand at the Pitchfork music festival in 2009. I
  didn't realize how few of them they made, and that it would never get a
  re-issue. This kind of thing would go out of style, and I assume it will never
  be repressed.]

- *Missiles* by **The Dears** - Another great Canadian husband/wife band (why
  are there so many of these?). If **The Arcade Fire** are too subtle for you,
  you can count on these guys. Super over the top, dramatic rock that manages to
  be both kinda stupid and very beautiful. [*Memory*: Around this time I was
  listening to the XM Canadian indie channel called "The Verge" where I
  discovered this band and many other favorites.]

- *Offend Maggie* by **Deerhoof** - Simultaneously one of the heavier and
  quieter albums by one of the most unique acts to come out of millennial indie.
  [*Memory*: I regretted buying this on vinyl at the time, which feels odd to me
  now. It also happens to be one of the more valuable albums I own now.]

- *Microcastle* by **Deerhunter** - This is where the formula came together. All
  the great psychedelic atmospherics were still there, but now we had moments of
  supreme pop songwriting spread throughout. [*Memory*: I was always very
  skeptical of Pitchfork, but man they were right to champion this amazing
  record.]

- *In Ear Park* by **Department of Eagles** - One of those records I like way
  more than almost everyone else. I still like this slightly more than any of
  the albums by Dan Rosen's main band, **Grizzly Bear**. I've always been a
  sucker for this kind of fuzzy, layered production, and the spare piano based
  arrangements really work for this kind of music. [*Memory*: For some reason
  this became a favorite album to listen to while I ran around this time.
  Totally inappropriate to task, this was the soundtrack to many laps around the
  Penn State IM building track.]

- *The Barbarians Move In* by **Duels** - A massive change-up after the UK Indie
  pop of the first record. A moody post-punk record, with moments of orchestral
  rock pomp. The title song is a striking, dirge-like record that makes me
  wonder what happened to these guys between releases [*Memory*: I didn't
  realize until the end of the year that this had come out. There were a few
  reviews on Amazon where folks were calling this a lost classic. They were right.] 

- *4* by **Dungen** - A return to the softer, more melodic side of things.
  Doesn't feature the flute like what came before and after, but still gorgeous
  stuff. [*Melody*: This was around the time the English language imitators
  **Tame Impala** appeared. It really bummed me out that this album was
  overshadowed by second class copycats.]

- *The Seldom Seen Kid* by **Elbow** - The biggest band to come out of 2000s UK
  Indie. They came up with a sound that combined the best points of **Blur**
  style Britpop and classic **Peter Gabriel** style Art Rock. This was the album
  after which they became too big to be Indie any longer. [*Memory*: When this
  album first was getting press, I dismissed it as the next **Coldplay** but I'm
  glad they proved me wrong.]

- *Sleep Well* by **Electric President** - This was the last record that I really
  enjoyed from the minimalist electro-indie pop that was big in the first decade
  of the millennium. Some really great shoegazey post-rocky guitar in this one
  that added a new texture to their sound. A very mellow record with a calm vibe
  that I really enjoy. [*Memory*: This reminds me of the walks that I would take
  during lunch break from work, listening to my latest music acquisitions on my
  old school Sansa 200 MP3 player. This was a nice calm record to put on in the
  middle of stressful day at a startup company.]

- *The Midnight Organ Fight* by **Frightened Rabbit** - The most Scottish of the
  Scottish bands. Such a wonderful folk-punk band with enough UK Indie bombast
  to make a big sound without going over the top. They would never match this
  again, but most bands never make one almost this amazing. [*Memory*: I liked
  this record the first time I heard it, but I didn't really connect with it
  until a trip to LA in late 2008. This was a difficult trip for me, as I
  realized I was growing apart from the group of friends I was traveling with. I
  took the MetroLink train into the city solo to have a look around, and this
  was the soundtrack to my visit.]

- *Into Your Lungs...* by **Hey Rosetta!** - This year was probably the peak of
  Canadian Indie and this was one of the most representative records of the
  scene. So big (but unpretentious), so elegantly produced (but still quaintly
  charming), a remarkable record. Americans can't make music this kind of music
  without sounding like cheeseballs. [*Memory*: This was another record that got
  a ton of play on XM The Verge. Canadian Indie was where it was at in 2008.]

- *Made in the Dark* by **Hot Chip** - The start of a more "serious" turn from
  these guys. This still is slightly goofy dance-pop, but the humor was no
  longer the focus. Still charmingly self-recorded, but the more straight ahead
  themes makes for a more long lasting impact. [*Memory*: I forever get this
  mixed up with the record that would come next (they are both great!) I even
  included this record in the image for both years.]

- *Feed the Animals* by **Girl Talk** - One of the last great outcomes of pop
  music's post modern era. It was also one of the most notable "pay what you
  want" downloads in the post-MP3 era. His best attempt at merging the classic
  rock and hip-hop eras. [*Memory*: Another running playlist regular for me.
  Hard to hear this without thinking about turning laps at Tudek Park in State
  College, PA.]

- *Couples* by **The Long Blondes** - One of the most unjustifiably ignored
  follow up records out there. Just as good as their much loved debut, this
  record probably mostly suffered from a lack of promotion and tour support. My
  favorite band from the pop side of the post punk revival, this band blows away
  **The Yeah, Yeah, Yeahs** in my opinion. It is very sad this would be the end.
  [*Memory*: I was amazed to buy an unopened back-stock original pressing of
  this in 2021, 13 years after release (on Amazon of all places!).]

- *Saturdays = Youth* by **M83** - Looking back, it almost seems like this
  record is the genesis of the entire "imagined 80s" aesthetic that would
  predominate a wide swath of the indie over the next 3-4 years. The chillwave,
  the vaporwave, the other acts that seemed to be imitating a kind of 80s pop
  music that never actually quite existed. Look at that cover, and its
  characters from not quite a John Hughes film. It isn't actually that different
  from what this band had done in the record that preceded it, but it just found
  a focus that anticipated what was to come. [*Memory*: It is hard to think of
  this record without thinking of Hipster Runoff. Our boy Carles also understood
  how important this sound would be to the future direction of indie.]

- *Rabbit Habits* by **Man Man** - This album feels like a straight up
  modernization of the **Captain Beefheart** formula. It is a complete anomaly
  in the indie scene of the day that works really well. [*Memory*: This is the
  last show I would ever see at the State Theater in State College, PA. A great
  venue that would bring a kind of indie show to the town for a short window in
  the last years of the aughts. They didn't have a liquor license at the time,
  but had a great coffee shop. I was so hyped up on caffeine for the show, and
  that was the right state for this music. The headliner was **Cursive**, who
  were awful, and I left after one song.]

- *Nights Out* by **Metronomy** - Unlike most people, I prefer the more poppy
  records to come, but I like this as well. Much like **Hot Chip**, this band
  knows exactly where to find the line between joke band and serious music.
  [*Memory*: I was first attracted to this album by the amazing cover with the
  painting of the guy proudly in front of the first generation Honda Insight.]

- *Oracular Spectacular* by **MGMT** - No band or album exemplifies the
  "mainstreaming of indie" more than what we have here. It deserved to be the
  thing that broke indie to the general public. Fun but smart electronic pop
  music, the kind of thing that appeals to teenagers and music collecting forty
  year olds in equal measure. This is the least weird record this group is
  likely to ever make, and likely the beginning and the end of any wide cultural
  significance. [*Memory*: These guys have always been a major label act, but it
  was the indie music fans who discovered them first. It was shocking to see a
  band like this get such massive attention, but in retrospect the whole thing
  felt calculated by Columbia. The birth of Mindie Rock.]

- *A Thousand Shark's Teeth* by **My Brightest Diamond** - A transitionary
  record between the guitar centered songs she started with, and the very fancy
  chamber pop that was coming next. One of the greatest voices in indie, who
  often doesn't get enough credit for the range and quality of her songwriting.
  I do miss the occasional heaviness she worked into the first two records.
  [*Memory*: The first time I saw Shara live was at Bugjar in 2011, when she was
  still in the guitar focussed configuration of this album cycle. It was quietist
  I have ever seen an audience be while an artist performed at that venue.]

- *Skeletal Lamping* by **Of Montreal** - My opinions of this record have
  evolved significantly over time: starting at disappointing mess, to flawed but
  partially listenable, and today as possibly the best record by one of my
  favorite acts from these days. This collection of micro-songs really needs to
  be listened to all at once. It is also best not to spend too much time
  thinking about the often cringeworthy lyrics, and instead focus on how
  interesting it all sounds. [*Memory*: When this came out, I really thought
  that fame had gone to Kevin Barnes head, and ruined him. It turns out fame did
  go to his head, and created something wonderfully over the top.]

- *Third* by **Portishead** - [**2008 Favorite**] - It seems like this is going
  to be the last album by this legendary band, and I'm happy with this being
  their final and most important statement. There is no other album like this,
  and it arrived as wholely unique in music history. This haunting,
  uncomfortably minimalist electronic music only makes sense when listened to in
  a dark room. The way they deconstruct their own signature sound on "Machine
  Gun" is one of the most unique things a band has ever done. A top 5 favorite
  of mine forever. [*Memory*: This album made it painfully clear to me how bad
  the state of vinyl production was at the time. I bought three copies of it,
  until I was able to assemble a single reasonable copy from discs extracted
  from two different instances of the album.]

- *Rook* by **Shearwater** - Such a beautiful voice, and so much instrumental
  talent in this band. That said, this is the only one of their records that
  doesn't bore me to tears. The significant use of the classic emo quiet/loud
  dynamic is what does it for me I guess. [*Memory*: This was the vinyl album
  that made me realize how good things could be when you got a good pressing.
  For some reason, I was able to get this for like 5 bucks on Overstock.com. It
  was an impulse buy that inspired me to buy my first proper Turntable. I can
  remember clearly hearing the crisp, surface noise free sounds in my tiny
  upstairs room in the Woodycest apartment I shared at the time. I had the
  record on the Technics SL-1200 I still use, and probably will use for the rest
  of my life.]

- *At War With Walls & Mazes* by **Son Lux** - One of those acts that owes their
  career and fame to NPR music. This nerdy electo-hip hop is the kind of thing
  that is ready made for Public Radio. I prefer the proggy sounds that would
  come later with the full band incarnation, but this early recording still has
  much of the sounds that would be perfected in later work. [*Memory*: This
  record holds the distinction of being the first I owned and discovered
  exclusively on the vinyl format.]

- *Soft Airplane* by **Chad Vangaalen** - The weirdest folk rock record I have
  ever heard, and one of the best. The lyrics and music are both completely off
  the wall. I don't feel that he has ever reached these heights again as an
  artist, and it seems like his best effort went into his production of other
  artists from here on out. [*Memory*: Hearing the classic Casio drum machine
  sounds on "TMNT Mask" really took me back to the old SK-1 days.]

- *You & Me* by **The Walkmen** - By far my favorite band to come out of the
  Post Punk revival, they would rapidly transcend that genre and make amazing
  records like this. I love the warm textured sounds, and the over the top
  belting. I saw these guys twice on this tour. If I could go back in time
  to see any band, I would see the Walkmen at this point in their history.
  [*Memory*: I remember sitting in my tiny Rochester apartment as December 2009
  became January 2010 listening to the song "In the New Year". I hatched a plan
  to make a list of my favorite records from the closing decade. I never did
  that properly, but it started the larger project this site represents.]

- *Women* by **Women** - Angular, chaotic post-punk. They almost seem like the
  only band to follow on from **Wire's** late 70s trilogy. They even through in
  a slick pop song in "Black Rice". Stellar stuff, I wish they were able to make
  more than the two albums they left us. [*Memory*: This album was a complete
  impulse buy that I threw in on a vinyl order from the Simply Canadian website.
  I was intimidated by it at first, but the format made me stick with it, and
  I'm glad I did, wow!]

- *Insurgentes* by **Steven Wilson** - Looking back now, his first solo record
  was the biggest deviation from the **Porcupine Tree** sound. It is hard to put
  a finger on exactly what is different, but this is clearly more a product of a
  single person working alone. I think his music has been well served by the
  changes, and alone his music has been more consistent than his band ever was.
  "Significant Other" with its layered ethereal vocals and creepy toy piano is
  probably still my favorite thing from his solo era. [*Memory*: I remember at
  the time reflecting on how this was the last vestiges of my musical past, with
  indie my clear future.]

2009
----

I have been looking forward to this year. That is because in 2009 I spent
a lot of time documenting my favorites of the year, and therefore have a very
detailed understanding of my top records at the time of release. I even went so
far as to make a three disc compilation of my top tracks and distribute to my
friends. It was a throwback to my 1999 compilation (more on that later) and a
way to cap off what was a landmark year for my relationship with contemporary
pop music. That said, looking at the notes I distributed with the mix CDs, I
have to cringe a bit.

.. image:: images/2009_mixes.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: notes to my 2009 mix CDs

I sound so young for a 29 year old, but I think my connection to pop music at
the time was making me feel young and I wanted to revel in it a bit. Admittedly,
I would never feel this connected to pop music again. Despite these somewhat
silly notes, I would actually get quite a few positive comments about the mix,
and even received three mixes in response! None of them were as carefully
curated and supplemented with footnotes, but it was nice to hear what other
folks were into at the time. I feel like I could spend a remarkable amount of
time analyzing how I feel now compared to what my impressions were at the time,
but for now I am going to keep this to a simple comparison of my top albums then
and now. Here are the albums that appear in my 2009 top 20 that I no longer
consider to be among my favorites:

- *Mythomania* by **Cryptacise** - (#7) I was really feeling high on this band after
  seeing them at Noise Pop 2009, but my interest really faded as I got away from
  that show. In general that early 60s pop revival stuff hasn't aged great for
  me.
  
- *A Brief History of Love* by **The Big Pink** - (#8) Two killer singles "Dominos"
  and especially "Velvet" made me greatly overate this at the time.

- *Eyes & Eyes & Eyes Ago* by **Nesey Gallons** - (#9) I really was into
  Elephant 6 at the time, and wanted to like the latest artists in the
  collective, even if they weren't up to spec.

- *Up From Below* by **Edward Sharpe and the Magnetic Zeros** - (#12) I
  didn't like their "dirt hipster" image when I saw them live, mostly because of
  my bad experiences with this demographic as as South Wedge resident. Listening
  to this record again with fresh ears, I probably need to give it another
  chance.
  
- *Wolfgang Amadeus Phoenix* by **Phoenix** - (#17) I used to love these guys,
  but listening now I can't understand why. Such generic dance indie.

- *Embryonic* by **The Flaming Lips** - (#18) Totally fine, like most of their
  records. Doesn't feel as interesting after others have done this kind of thing
  much better.

- *The Good Feeling Music of Dent May & His Magnificent Ukulele* by **Dent May**
  - (#20) I was responding to the amazing pop songcraft here, despite the
  annoying ukulele packaging. With his later work, this is inessential. Wish he
  had made a new version of the brilliant "College Town Boy" though.

As for my numbers 21-40, that feels like me stretching to make a list, though I
will comment on a couple that moved up to my favorites when they show up in my
current list.

This was the year I attended my first two music festivals, where I discovered
a ton of music. Also, in the fall I moved to Rochester, NY and had access to
much more live music and four fantastic record stores. It was at one of these,
Lakeshore Record Exchange, that I would buy many of the last CDs in my
collection. This is the last year that CDs will appear in significant number in
my photo of favorites. This was the most involved photo in this whole project to
create. I put a record in there by accident that isn't among my favorites, can
you spot it? I'm certainly not going to go through the process of making it again!

.. image:: images/2009.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2009 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe 
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/0IPTLmZ3RFsfkUmPdVKZP8?utm_source=generator&theme=0"
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; 
  encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"></iframe>

- *Ashes Grammar* by **A Sunny Day in Glasgow** - While most of the bands were
  trying to conjure up the sprit of the 80s, these guys were making the kind of
  electronic, vaguely world music sounds that are straight out of the mid-90s. A
  strange little art rock record that it is really hard to compare to anything.
  It manages to be densely complex, and charmingly amateurish at the same time.
  [Memory: I discovered this while perusing the Pitchfork best of 2009 list.
  This really was the best era for that website actually promoting good music.]

- *Abnormally Attracted to Sin* by **Tori Amos** - I wasn't paying very close attention to
  Tori's career when this came out, and didn't really listen to it closely until
  almost a decade later. This is as wild record, where she seems to be trying
  out some of the popular music trends that had transpired during her 20-odd
  years in the industry. "Police Me" is particularly out there sound for Tori,
  and I'm not sure how to describe what it even is. 2007-2009 was the most
  experimental and diverse time in her career. it doesn't all work, but it will
  never stop being interesting. [*Memory*: This was one of the very last CDs I
  ever purchased at a Best Buy.]

- *Merriweather Post Pavilion* by **Animal Collective** - This is one of those
  records that was absolutely huge at the time, but you rarely hear about now.
  It still really holds up pretty well. Kind of a low-fi, electronic *Pet
  Sounds*, I rarely listen to it anymore, but always enjoy when I do. [*Memory*:
  This was one of the first albums I bought in 2009, and one of the first new
  releases I purchased on vinyl. I tried to buy it from Greg at City Lights, but
  he refused to switch back to vinyl. Probably why his store is no longer with
  us.]
  
- *Hospice* by **The Antlers** - As my mix-notes indicate above, this was my
  album of the year at the time. That isn't true anymore, but I still think this
  is a beautiful and haunted set of songs that I'm alway happy hear. However,
  the sullen mood and subject matter is something that I'm generally no seeking
  out. [*Memory*: I saw them play almost the entire album in sequence at
  Pitchfork Music Festival in 2009, and that powerful performance was one of the
  best I have ever seen]

- *Humbug* by **Arctic Monkeys** - I had enjoyed their first two records, but
  for some reason this is where it started to really click for me. They are
  mining the goth sounds that I love here a bit. It is also the album where the
  pop song-craft really started to take form. "Crying Lightning" is a remarkable
  pop-rock song. [*Memory*: When I moved to rochester my record collection had
  started to grow significantly. I remember constructing new record crates to
  store them, sitting on the old green carpet in the entry hall of my tiny attic
  apartment.]

- *Best Rest Forth Mouth* by **Bear in Heaven** - Ah, the era of the percussive
  electronic music. These guys were the best at it, and they didn't even need
  a floor tom guy to make it work. It was refreshing to see bands that were
  working in a synthpop adjacent space, who had no interest in digging up the
  80s. [*Memory*: The lead singer of this band had a great ironic mustache,
  which was the style of the time. Shortly their after, Movember, was developed
  as an excuse for men to grow mustaches again. I would grow a pretty sweet one
  of my own.]
  
- *March of the Zapotec/Holland* by **Beirut** - This collection of two EPs, is
  highly successful in two very different genres. The first, is the typical
  world music, chamber pop this guy is generally making, but with a huge brass
  band. The second is delightful, early 90s techno. The combination works great
  together somehow. [*Memory*: These guys embody the 2000s more than anyone. I
  had to pick a performance by them from Pitchfork 2009 for the banner on this page.]

- *Susan Storm's Ugly Sister and Other Saints and Superheroes* by **Rachel
  Taylor Brown** - Such a cool concept for an album that is done mostly really
  well. Less famous (mostly imaginary, and quite troubled) comic book
  characters, and religious myths (The original superheroes). [*Memory*: I don't
  know if this is true or not, but I remember this CD as the first thing I ever
  ordered online and had delivered to my new home of Rochester.]

- *The Hazards of Love* by **The Decemberists** - This band had been heading
  down a road of fairy tales and prog rock that peaked with with release. Some
  great vocal contributions from Shara Nova of **My Brightest Diamond**. I wish
  it was a little shorter, and would probably come back to it more if it had
  been trimmed down a bit. [*Memory*: There was an amazing full performance
  video of this on YouTube back in the day, I really wish that was still
  available.] 
  
- *Bitte Orca* by **Dirty Projectors** - I don't know that a band has ever done
  more with less technical proficiency (outside of punk music anyway). I don't
  think this record is as intentionally arty as the reviews would have you
  believe. This is a band stretching their skills way beyond the advisable. So
  charmingly amateurish, and somehow it adds up to way more than its individual
  parts. Everyone in this band had a completely untrained voice, and it all
  works.[*Memory*: I was very resistent to this record at first given how rough
  around the edges it is, and how much Pitchfork was pushing it.]

- *The Duckworth Lewis Method* by **The Duckworth Lewis Method** - A very late
  addition that I discovered more than a decade after release. Amazing in the
  way **The Divine Comedy** always is, but with a sense of whimsey that could
  only be produced by a concept album about the sport of cricket. I don't
  understand all the references here, but the examination of Britain's falling
  stature in the game, as an analogy for larger world issues is hard to miss.
  [*Memory*: I listened to this album more than any other in the year of 2021,
  and it even inspired me to research, and learn the rules and strategy of
  cricket so I could understand it better.]

- *Tarot Sport* by **Fuck Buttons** - I think they tried to come up with a new
  genre name for this kind of thing, but looking back it just fits on the
  electronic branch of the post rock tree. Such positive high energy music, I
  used to put this on the end of running playlists to get me home from long
  runs. [*Memory*: This is the first new release that I really had to extend
  effort to get on vinyl. I imported a copy from Amazon UK.]

- *Con Law* by **Generationals** - Remembering back to this era I think of two
  things: Chillwave, and this kind of straightforward, dance-able pop music.
  This first record has a rawness to it that would be sanded off in their later,
  more big-budget releases. They work better in this lower fidelity format.
  [*Memory*: One of the many great bands I saw play to a mostly empty room at
  Bugjar. Those who were there had a great time bopping around to these guys.]

- *Album* by **Girls** - One of my favorite bands of all time, and I pretty much
  love everything they did in their short career. My favorite will always be
  this collection of stunning pop songs. "Hellhole Ratrace" is a remarkable
  story of refusing to give up, and learning to go it alone when there is no one
  else to lean on. [*Memory*: I'm so glad I was able to catch these guys at
  Pitchfork 2010, as they would break up not long after.]
 
- *Veckatimest* by **Grizzly Bear** - This was my point of entry for this band.
  There first couple records didn't connect with me, but there was something
  about the more tightly constructed songs on this album that made me appreciate
  their psych folk sound way more. I can't think of a group with a more
  distinctive sound, and every record since this one has had a very similar
  feel, but I'm not anywhere close to being tired of it. [*Memory*: On one of my
  first extended business trips to Rochester, I remember brining along my newly
  purchased CD of this one. I remember for some reason I was assigned a full
  size pickup as my rental car. I also remember how amazing "Two Weeks" sounded
  the first time I heard it while pulling into the East Henrietta Country Inn
  and Suites.]

- *Here We Go Magic* by **Here We Go Magic** - If you were to strip **Grizzly
  Bear** back to the bare essentials, you would have something like this record.
  The next album, by the full band version of this act would blow this away, but
  there is some real magic in songs like "Fangela". [*Memory*: When I saw this
  band in 2010 I bought a shirt with the cover of this album on it. It had a
  hold in the sleeve, and I never wore it.]

- *Seek Magic* by **Memory Tapes** - This guy always hated being lumped in with
  the Chillwave bands. I can kind of understand why, as this is built from
  mostly very different parts. That said, the highly melodic and psychedelic
  sounds on offer here invoke the same sort of painful nostalgia for a 1980s
  that never existed. "Plain Material" is one of my all time favorite songs, and
  it is hard to hear it without seeing a crowd of wayfarer wearing hipsters
  bopping around in Union Park, Chicago. [*Memory*: At Pitchfork 2009, this
  record was for sale at the same amazing booth that had the Minimal Wave
  compilations. I passed on it, and regretted it for almost a decade. I was
  eventually able to get a vinyl reissue of this one.]

- *Fantasies* by **Metric** - The last great album by one of the great Canadian
  indie bands, in the year that the Canadian renaissance started to wrap up. I
  know they are still out there making music, but this is where it all starts
  sounding the same to me. [*Memory*: This is one of the very first CDs that I
  bought at Lakeshore Record Exchange, the alternative record store a two blocks 
  walk from my new apartment in Rochester, NY.]

- *No More Stories...* by **Mew** - [**2009 FAVORITE**] - Only Scandinavians can
  make this kind of music. So warm and comfy, such catchy pop songs. This isn't
  chillwave, but it is making clear references to same imagined version of the
  1980s. [*Memory*: I wish I knew how much I liked this band so I went to see
  them at Pitchfork 2009 on the B stage.]

- *Wind's Poem* by **Mount Eerie** - Such a heavy, beautiful record. I love how
  it hides all those melodies in that sea of noise. Needs to be listened to at
  high volume full the full impact. [*Memory*: I didn't full appreciate this
  record until I listened to it on a night drive at high volume, from beginning
  to end. The way this should be experienced]

- *The Life of the World to Come* by **Mountain Goats** - For some reason this
  record separates itself from the dozens of others from this guy. It is the
  same kind of self-produced indie folk/punk, but somehow by far my favorite.
  [*Memory*: I liked this record going in, but I loved this record after seeing
  a screening of a performance film of the whole record at Noise Pop 2010.]

- *The Resistance* by **Muse** - I always heard **Queen** when I listened to
  these guys in a way that other folks did not seem to hear. Well after this
  album I think I wasn't the only one. Very over the top, and an exceptional
  hard rock album. [*Memory*: I saw them on the tour for this record in Toronto
  with some work friends.]

- *Psychic Chasms* by **Neon Indian** - This is probably the definitive
  Chillwave record and "Deadbeat Summer" the definitive song in the genre. It
  also illustrates how the low budget production values were an essential part
  of the formula. His later, more refined records just don't hold up to this
  fuzzy, messy masterpiece. [*Memory*: I don't know that any record makes me
  think of my tiny, dingy Park Avenue apartment than this one. I listened to
  this a lot back in those days.]

- *The Pains of Being Pure atHeart* by **The Pains of Being Pure at Heart** -
  There was a massive "Pitchfork backlash" against this one since the site
  seemed to be way more into this than most. That said, they were absolutely
  right, and this kind pop/rock is timeless. I think everyone expected some kind
  of C86 revival, but this is really the only major artifact we got out of it.
  [*Memory*: At the Pitchfork music festival in 2009 I had just heard **The
  Antlers** play on the B stage and I was walking over to the main stages, and I
  heard these guys playing "Stay Alive". I spontaneously starting twirling
  around in a circle as I walked. It was the last time I ever felt young.]

- *You Can Have What You Want* by **Papercuts** - A fuzzy kind of psychedelic
  music that was compatible with, but not directly related to the prevailing
  trends of the time. A great album throughout, but "The Machine WIll Tell Us
  So" is one of my songs of the decade. This record almost fits better in 1999
  than 2009 and it sounds timeless today. [*Memory*: I discovered this band
  opening for *Camera Obscura* at the German House in the Rochester South Wedge.
  I was nervous to walk through an unfamiliar neighborhood carrying my new copy
  of their LP. I now own a house in that very neighborhood.]

- *Real Estate* by **Real Estate** - Making this list it is clear how this was
  the peak of fuzzy psychedelic music. These guys are making really pleasant
  jangly pop, with the fuzz dial turned up to 11. [*Memory*: I didn't get into
  this band until I saw them at a Pitchfork after-show in 2011. I was there to
  see Dent May, but these guys were super impressive live.]

- *Junior* by **Röyksopp** - It was tough to pick a favorite for this year, as I
  was split between the one I picked and this stellar record. Interestingly, I
  didn't even put this on my list of favorite albums I made at the time! I was
  already into this band by 2009, and their ambient classic *Melody AM* was a favorite.
  This album was a shock, as they had transformed into some sort of Scandinavian
  **Daft Punk**. This is stunning electro-pop record, and I wish we had gotten
  more like it. [*Memory*: I held a vinyl copy of this in my hands once. I
  didn't understand how great it was then. I greatly regret not buying it.]

- *Small Black EP* by **Small Black** - Another of the cornerstones of
  Chillwave, this has a timeless sound that has aged really well. "Weird
  Machines" is probably my favorite track from the whole genre. These guys did
  survive the transition to more refined production values pretty well, but I
  still prefer the fuzzy, heavily clipped sound of this record. You can't keep
  making this kind of music forever though. [*Memory*: I saw these guys at
  BugJar some random weeknight and remember being disappointed by how bro-ish
  these guys looked in their athleisure gear and ball caps.]

- *Actor* by **St. Vincent** - A refinement of the sound from her first record,
  and by far my favorite release by the artist. Eccentric bedroom pop with a
  sharp rock edge, made without any notion of stardom or awareness of mass
  popularity. Things would change after this record, in ways I did not care for.
  [*Memory*: I saw her at Noise Pop 2009 (Great American Music Hall) right
  before this came out. It was an outstanding show, and how I will always prefer
  to remember the artist.]

- *Suckers EP* by **Suckers** - I'm not exactly sure how to describe this genre,
  but it falls in the same space as bands like **Yeasayer** or **Menomena**.
  Highly percussive, with meandering instrumental passages, and serious music
  that isn't afraid to be very fun. They didn't last long, but what they made
  was great. [*Memory*: One of the last conversations I had with Greg at City
  Lights Records (State College, PA) was about this record. He knew I was very
  into **MGMT** and **Menomena** and he asked if I had heard the other band on
  the big summer tour (these guys). He spun his CD-R of the EP for me.]

- *The BQE* by **Sufjan Stevens** - Mark this down as one of those records I
  like way more than almost anyone else. An amazing film soundtrack that borders
  on Contemporary Classical, and Sufjan pushing his middle period sound to its
  fullest extreme. This was also gave a preview of the electronic sounds that
  were to come. [*Memory*: I bought this (with a wad of other releases) at
  Lakeshore Record Exchange and listened to them repeatedly as I taught myself
  how to wax my cross-country skiis in the basement lab at my work.]

- *The XX* by **The XX** - A minimalist rock record that was wildly popular at
  the time and that you hear little about today. My personal relationship has a
  similar arc to it. One of my very favorites at the time, but something I
  rarely find myself returning to today. Minimalism is tough. If what little is
  there doesn't have a lot of depth to it, it gets old quick. That said, I have
  to include it, even if my time with it was brief but intense. [*Memory*:
  Hipster Runoff loved to make fun of this record. Carles always had a good
  understanding of what hype records were going to fade a bit over time.]

- *Spirit Animal* by **Zombi** - It was strange to hear this kind of
  instrumental prog rock in the 21st century. It not only exists, but is
  excellent, especially the epic title track. [*Memory*: I discovered this
  album when it was played before a **Dungen** show at Mohawk Place in Buffalo,
  NY. I used the Shazaam music matching service to find it, and immediately
  downloaded from eMusic. I was pleasantly surprized to see these guys play a
  great opening set for **Ghost** half a decade later.]

Footnotes
---------

**Songs from Albums that Didn't Make my Lists**

This is the decade with the most albums, and by far the most favorite songs.

- "Jessica" by **Adam Green** - I don't know that anything summarizes the break
  between mainstream pop and the indie creatives than this satire of Jessica Simpson.

- "Save Me" by **Aimee Mann** - I've still never seen "Magnolia" but I really
  like this song.

- "Lisa" by **Albert Hammond Jr** - I feel like this guy is wasting away in
  **The Strokes**. What a genius pop song.

- "Everyone Gets a Star" by **Albert Hammond Jr** - ditto, see above

- "Flip!" by **Apollo Sunshine** - There was a time when it looked like Philly
  was going to become an indie stronghold. We got this song and a few others.

- "Do the Whirlwind" by **Architecture In Helsinki** - Goofy childlike indie
  that I can't take for an entire album, but this song is great.

- "Again" by **Archive** - It is so strange how these guys had exactly one
  great song and it is a 16 minute art rock epic.

- "I Bet You Look Good On The Dancefloor" by **Arctic Monkeys** - The single
  that started it all for one of the greatest bands of the last 20 years.

- "Half Light" by **Athlete** - It is now trendy to call this kind of thing
  landfill indie, and I get it. There were some pretty good landfill indie songs though.

- "Elephant Gun" by **Beirut** - Their best song appears on an otherwise
  unspectacular EP. Gorgeous stuff.

- "The Model" by **Belle and Sebastian** - An amazing track off a generally
  mediocre record, with great shared vocals by Stuart and Stevie.

- "Your Cover's Blown" by **Belle and Sebastian** - Continuing the tradition of
  EP greatness, this is a look at the retro pop future for these guys.

- "The Hole in Me - Remastered" by **Blackfield** - The only high point from
  the three album output of this **Steven Wilson** light touch side project.

- "Red World" by **Blank Dogs** - I will always remember hearing this play at
  the gone but not forgotten Aquarius records in San Francisco, and walking out
  with a copy of the EP. The exact right kind of record to buy at that shop.

- "No Compass" by **Blank Dogs** - A delightful deconstruction of the **New
  Order** sound.

- "First Day of My Life" by **Bright Eyes** - At this point, he co-uldn't make a
  great album anymore, but there were always great songs.

- "Gold Mine Gutted" by **Bright Eyes** - see above

- "Anthems for a Seventeen Year Old Girl" by **Broken Social Scene** - An
  extremely simple vocoder heavy vocal melody over a dense interesting
  instrumental background.

- "Liar" by **Built To Spill** - The later albums end up sounds more than a
  little like **Death Cab of Cutie** in a good way.

- "It Dawned on Me" by **Calla** - The kings of one great song per album, this
  was the first one I heard.

- "Fear Of Fireflies" by **Calla** - Why is the good song always the first one?

- "Tarantula" by **Calla** - Such a wonderful mysterious instrumental to start
  with, unfortunately they couldn't maintain this level.

- "The Greatest" by **Cat Power** - It is strange to see someone I used to love
  represented by only one song.

- "Signal Morning" by **Circulatory System** - I was so excited for a new album
  from these guys, but it only produced one great track.

- "I Believe" by **"Conjure One, Rhys Fulber"** - A very unexpected cover, and
  it is weird to hear the king of ambient industrial and world music fusion sing.

- "Pour Le Monde" by **Crowded House** - The best song you will ever hear play
  the background at CVS.

- "Tail & Mane" by **Cryptacize** - I saw them open for **St. Vincent** at Noise
  pop 2009 and the positive experience made me get very into them for a while.
  I'm left only with a lasting interest in this song.

- "Alice Practice" by **Crystal Castles** - So abrasive. I hated it at first,
  but wow did it grow on me.

- ""Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger"" by **Daft Punk** - I discoverd these guys
  from an Apple commercial and this song. Still really like this track, but I've
  never seen the record as the classic it is popularly thought to be.

- "Strange Overtones" by **David Byrne** - It was jarring for this duo who
  previously made wildly experimental music, to make such a stunning pop song.
  Those Eno backing vocals really complete the song.

- "College Town Boy" by **Dent May** - I can't abide this phase of his career
  anymore, but this is very funny enjoyable track. He should make a new version.

- "Precious" by **Depeche Mode** - Around this time I tended to assume they were
  going to be over the hill, but they kept making great tracks that sounded
  surprisingly modern.

- "White Flag" by **Dido** - I felt a bit silly at the time (less so now) about how
  much I like this syrupy adult contemporary track.

- "Brand New Day" by **Dizzee Rascal** - One of the more off genre things that
  Sirius Left of Center played was UK Hip Hop. This is a classic of that scene.

- "My Old Ways" by **Dr. Dog** - Another group I'm bored with at this point, but
  I still really like this one track.

- "Home" by **Edward Sharpe & The Magnetic Zeros** - Not as charming as it once
  was, but still a fun little pop song.

- "It's A Motherfucker" by **Eels** - I'm a huge fan of this guys lyrics and
  voice, and both are on display here.

- "1234" by **Feist** - Was that Ipod Video commercial when indie broke into the
  mainstream? 

- "My Moon My Man" by **Feist** - A terrific little jazzy pop song on an album
  that I otherwise mostly find boring.

- "Emerge" by **Fischerspooner** - Was there ever another artist in the genre of
  electroclash?

- "Mykonos" by **Fleet Foxes** - They are so overrated in my opinion, but each
  album has had one great song.

- "He Doesn't Know Why" by **Fleet Foxes** - ...and this is the best of them all.

- "Play the Hits" by **Hal** - The only other band that was doing anything like
  the delightful little pop of **The Thrills**.

- "Cinders" by **Holopaw** - A latter day slowcore act spices things up with a
  little brass.

- "Losing Light" by **Holopaw** - Really nice mellow mood on this one.

- "Boy From School" by **Hot Chip** - I much prefer their later work, but this
  is my favorite from the early records.

- "Bandages" by **Hot Hot Heat** - I've liked this song since 2003 and I'm not
  sure I have ever heard the album.

- "Nice to Know You" by **Incubus** - An early indie band that made it big with
  this one.

- "Pioneer To The Falls" by **Interpol** - Their best song on an otherwise
  unremarkable record.

- "Such Great Heights" by **Iron & Wine** - A song so good, it was an indie hit
  twice in two years.

- "Ruby" by **Kaiser Chiefs** - After their first record, these guys went very
  pop. It worked really well at times, like here.

- "Like It Too Much" by **Kaiser Chiefs** - My favorite of their later poppier
  records. Such a fun, interesting track.

- "A.D.I.D.A.S. (feat. Big Boi)" by **"Killer Mike, Big Boi"** - The best song
  from the electro-funk era of southern rap.

- "I'd Rather Dance With You" by **Kings of Convenience** - I don't know that I
  would need to read the bio to know these guys are Scandinavian.

- "Stutter" by **Lake Trout** - This band has so much potential, and their jazz
  influenced alt rock does a great job staying out of jam band territory.

- "Angelica" by **Lamb** - Yes I know this is mostly "Clair De Lune", but they
  do such a great job making it into a cool trip hop song.

- "Ain't Never Been Cool" by **Lucky Soul** - For a second it seemed like there
  was going to be an indie-pop revival of the early 60s sound, but this is one
  of the few interesting things to come out of it.

- "Sneffels Yokul" by **Make A Rising** - Every now and then NPR Music
  highlights something obscure and fascinating, and this is one of those.

- "Like U Crazy" by **Mates of State** - I saw these guys open for **Death Cab
  for Cutie** and came home with this, there most recent release. This goofy
  over the top love song is the only thing I still connect with from this silly
  husband/wife pop act.

- "Daylight" by **Matt and Kim** - This song was everywhere in 2009 and for good
  reason, it is a pop gem that combines an amazing piano hook with really
  interesting hip hop inspired drumming.

- "Golden Phone" by **Micachu & The Shapes** - This band was going to be the
  next big thing, but they really only left us with this great little eccentric
  pop song.

- "Study War" by **Moby** - A cool little latter day song by this guy, but at
  this point he was mostly mining his own past.

- "Dancefloors" by **My Morning Jacket** - A great little country rocker off a
  nearly great album.

- "Star Witness" by **Neko Case** - A great little dark country song that feels
  made for the NPR airwaves.

- "Aurora Borealis" by **Nesey Gallons** - An obscure Elephant6 gem from the
  height of my interest in the collective.

- "Right Where It Belongs" by **Nine Inch Nails** - I have never been able to
  get into their work after the 1990s, but this is the best of their later day
  songs. Perhaps because it sounds the most like something off of the 90s records.

- "Teen Creeps" by **No Age** - I'll never forget seeing them play this song at
  Bottom of the Hill in San Francisco at noise pop 2009.

- "I Was Never Young" by **of Montreal** - How I discovered them, when this was
  used in a TV commercial.

- "Breakfast in NYC" by **Oppenheimer** - Somehow these guys were super popular
  in State College, PA for a short period. This is a great little electronic
  indie-pop song.

- "Illuminate" by **Orbital** - The first CD I got from these guys was an early
  2000s compilation (found at a CD and Tape exchange in Cleveland) and a
  gravitated to this fairly straightforward pop song that doesn't really fit
  into the rest of their catalog. This really seems to anticipate the sound that
  **Daft Punk** was about to make big.

- "The Whole World (feat. Killer Mike)" by **"Outkast, Killer Mike"** - I didn't
  really take hip hop seriously and thought of it mostly as party music until I
  heard this amazing track.

- "This Is The Dream Of Win & Regine" by **Owen Pallett** - A terrific track of
  of his first record that gives indications of the brilliance to come.

- "Sleepyhead" by **Passion Pit** - What in the hell happened to the Pashy Pit?
  This song was so huge and they quickly disappeared.

- "Big Black Coffin" by **Peter Bjorn and John** - I love these stunning little
  sad pop songs these guys can make.

- "Nothing To Worry About" by **Peter Bjorn and John** - This albums was as
  weird departure and it really works on this one track.

- "Everything Is Everything" by **Phoenix** - They were more of a singles band
  for me and it felt like each album had one track that rose above the sameness
  of the other material.

- "Lisztomania" by **Phoenix** - See above

- "Bye Bye Bye" by **Plants and Animals** - Another time that NPR music
  highlighted a great track that would have otherwise not found an audience.
  This kind of indie folk was going out of style, but felt fresh here.

- "Hey Pretty" by **Poe** - An artist that I feel was never able to reach their
  full potential. A really cool rock song with electronic accents, and
  outstanding vocals. Not quite trip hop, but it fits in well with the sounds of
  the early 2000s.

- "Drawing the Line" by **Porcupine Tree** - The one great song off of their
  last album before hiatus. Much more of a straight ahead rock song than what
  these guys typically make.

- "Nude" by **Radiohead** - One of my favorite songs of all time comes off of an
  album that made me lose interest in the band.

- "Reckoner" by **Radiohead** - OK, two of my favorite songs of all time are
  somehow on an album I really didn't like in general.

- "Golden Touch - Full Length" by **Razorlight** - Might be "Landfill Indie" but
  it is good "Landfill Indie".

- "Lights Out" by **Santigold** - 

- "Tear You Apart" by **She Wants Revenge** - 

- "BlindBlindBlind" by **Silver Mt. Zion** - 

- "Two Way Monologue" by **Sondre Lerche** - 

- "Four to the Floor" by **Starsailor** - 

- "You Are The Blood" by **Sufjan Stevens** - 

- "Punkrocker - feat. Iggy Pop" by **Teddybears** - 

- "A Minha Menina" by **The Bees** - 

- "Go Karts" by **The Bees** - 

- "Velvet" by **The Big Pink** - 

- "Dominos" by **The Big Pink** - 

- "Cobalt Blue" by **The Church** - 

- "Pass It On" by **The Coral** - 

- "Dreaming of You" by **The Coral** - 

- "I Believe in a Thing Called Love" by **The Darkness** - 

- "No Cities Left" by **The Dears** - 

- ""The Gymnast, High Above the Ground"" by **The Decemberists** - 

- "California One / Youth and Beauty Brigade" by **The Decemberists** - 

- "Modern Moonlight" by **The Dresden Dolls** - 

- "Don't Know Why (You Stay)" by **The Essex Green** - 

- "Agenda Suicide" by **The Faint** - 

- "The W.A.N.D." by **The Flaming Lips** - 

- "Dynamo" by **The Golden Dogs** - 

- "Who's Got The Crack" by **The Moldy Peaches** - 

- "Girls" by **The Prodigy** - 

- "Phantom Limb" by **The Shins** - 

- "Dry Your Eyes" by **The Streets** - 

- "Seven Nation Army" by **The White Stripes** - 

- "Fell In Love With a Girl" by **The White Stripes** - 

- "Experimental Film" by **They Might Be Giants** - 

- "Sweet the Sting" by **Tori Amos** - 

- "Flowers In The Window" by **Travis** - 

- "Staring at the Sun" by **TV On The Radio** - 

- "Ambulance" by **TV On The Radio** - 

- "Oxford Comma" by **Vampire Weekend** - 

- "Maps" by **Yeah Yeah Yeahs** - 

- "Heads Will Roll" by **Yeah Yeah Yeahs** - 

**Exploring the Past**

When the decade started, I was still mostly looking into the music of the past.
As the years went on I continued to explore decades gone by, but simultaneous
to many artists and albums of the current age. In many cases there was a lot of
crossover between the two threads.

- **Genesis/Prog** - For most of my young life the early **Genesis** was as
  mysterious thing. I had often heard whispers of a very different band led by
  **Peter Gabriel** that was far more experimental than the 80s version I knew
  well. In the late 90s my brother had acquired a compilation of the band that
  included a couple songs from this era, and I was intrigued by the version of
  "The Carpet Crawlers" that closed out that record. In 2022 I would finally
  take the plunge and buy *The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway* knowing only
  "Crawlers" and the title song. It would open the door to one of my favorite
  bands. With the aid of Columbia House, I would go from zero to almost the
  entire catalog within a matter of months. Fourteen of these records make my
  list of all-time favorites, third most among all artists. In the early 2000s I
  kept my latest purchases in one of those leather bound CD wallets. I remember
  leafing through the book and showing my girlfriend what I was listening to,
  and her making fun of me mercilessly for all the **Genesis** records.
  Progressive rock will never be cool, but Genesis was my point of entry into
  the genre of **Rush**, **Yes**, **King Crimson** and many of my other favorite
  bands. It also was the purview of one of my favorite artists of the time
  **Porcupine Tree** / **Steven Wilson**.

- **UK Artists/The Kinks/The Jam/Blur** - It was a common thing for 90s
  teenagers to be Anglophiles, obsessed with UK music and culture. Much of this
  was centered around 60s bands like **The Beatles**. I was very much of this
  disposition and the interest continued and grew in my 20s. Early in the decade
  I had heard a sampling of **Kinks** tracks from the early "All Day, and All of the
  Night" (in a TV commercial) to "Lola" (a staple of classic rock radio) and I
  wanted to hear more. I remember an extensive search to find a comprehensive
  compilation that finally resulted in a two disc import collection that I found
  at the State College Circuit City around 2002. That disc provided me more
  enjoyment that I ever could have imagined and would be highly influential in
  my tastes going forward. A couple years later I heard the **Jam** track "Thats
  Entertainment" when streaming UK Virgin radio in my grad student office. I was
  intrigued that there was another band that like **The Kinks** were much more
  popular in the UK and had a mysterious catalog that I needed to know more
  about. Almost simultaneously, I had acquired a greatest hits compilation for
  the more contemporary band **Blur**, who also seemed defined by their
  "Britishness". This trilogy of "very English bands" would become central in my
  listening interests through the decade, and throughout my life since. These
  classic UK bands were obviously highly influential on the UK indie acts of the
  early 2000s like **Franz Ferdinand** and the **Kaiser Chiefs**.

- **XTC** - I was tempted to lump these guys into the very UK bands above, but
  it didn't feel quite right. They have always been a cult band on both sides of
  the Atlantic. I heard the song "Dear God" on Sirius First Wave (a channel that
  plays classic 80s alternative) in the summer of 2004, after which I sought out
  **Skylarking**. After getting my first real job, I quickly bought the entire
  catalog that was available at that time. Late in the decade, they would
  reissue the difficult to find "Apple Venus" records. I don't know that any
  band exemplifies the kind of intricate pop music that I love. All twelve of
  their studio albums make my list of favorites, and there is no other artist I
  can say anything like that about. I also think they were one of the primary
  influences on the indie-pop movement that was a major part of my early 2000s
  listening habits.

- **Eno/Roxy Music** - When I was a kid, I had the Microsoft Encarta digital
  encyclopedia on CD ROM, and it provided the kind of information that I would
  soon be seeking out on the internet but in a kind of larval form. I remember
  reading the article for **David Bowie** many times. Even before he was my
  favorite artist, the way the article described the artist intrigued me, and
  after I started exploring his music, it gave me ideas on where to go next. In
  addition to hearing about things like "the thin white duke" and the "Glass
  Spider Tour" the article called out several artists that were contemporaries
  of or inspired by Bowie, and in that list was Roxy music and the two Brians,
  Ferry and Eno. In 2004 I would finally hear **Roxy Music** on Sirius First
  Wave. This led me to their classic record **Country Life** which I picked up
  used at a CD & Tape exchange in Cleveland, OH. Interestingly, I have been
  slowly exploring the **Roxy Music** catalog up to the day that I write this. I
  finally purchased a vinyl copy of the last remaining studio LP *Manifesto* in
  September of 2022. Six of their records are now in my top favorites. **Brian
  Eno** was something I sought out purely on the reputation of his early
  records, and my fuzzy memories of that Encarta article. When I started to
  explore his music in 2005, he was in the midst of a major CD reissue program,
  and I bought the whole lot. His four initial pop records, and one of his early
  ambient works make my list.

- **Live Aid/Ultravox/Style Council** - Also in 2004 (this was obviously a year
  when I really started to research the musical past) I purchased a newly
  released DVD box set of the 1985 Live Aid concerts. Those performances had
  always been a bit mysterious to me as they were seldom shown on TV (outside of
  the famous **Queen** set) and I also had the unique situation of having been
  right next to the Philadelphia event while it was going on. On that famous day
  in July 1985 I was with my family at a religious convention in the next
  stadium over. I was only five, but my older brothers definitely wanted to be
  over in JFK stadium for the show instead of sweating their butts off in a suit
  listening to religious propaganda. The DVDs reconnected me with a lot of pop
  music of that day that I had forgotten about (**Paul Young**, **Nik
  Kershaw**), gave me a greater appreciation of acts I had never given proper
  attention (**Madonna**, **Judas Priest**, **Hall and Oates**), and helped me
  discover a few new favorites. I had never heard of **Ultravox** until I
  watched those DVDs for the first time, but immediately after listening, I
  sought out a collection of their Midge Ure era records. I'm still mystified
  why this wonderful and influential new wave act has never gotten any
  mainstream attention in the US. I have to admit that the first time I watched
  the UK portion of the Live Aid show, I thought that **The Style Council** were
  mostly hilarious. I had a hard time taking them too seriously with their
  aggressively 80s style and blued eyed soul music. After I learned to enjoy the
  last record by Paul Weller's first band **The Jam** I started to understand
  what the **Style** were about, and had a new found appreciation. In the last
  years of the decade I even sought out their most famous records. Greg at City
  Lights records always told me he would make me a great deal on the
  comprehensive box set he had kept in stock a decade plus past its cultural
  relevance. I never took him up on his offer, but I did go back and buy it at
  Chronic Town in State College where he was selling some of his remaining stock
  by consignment. I like these guys enough now that I have re-bought their
  entire catalog (minus the crap last record) on vinyl. I had a strange holiday
  tradition where I watched the Live Aid DVDs every Christmas season from 2004
  until 2020, and I pretty much have the concert memorized at this point.

- **Post-Rock** - On a couple occasions I bought records purely because they
  seemed so disproportionately loved on RateYourMusic, and such was the case
  with *Spirit of Eden* by **Talk Talk**. This 2006 purchase led me into the now
  much maligned genre of Post Rock, which at the time was still one of the most
  active and loved genres of the day. This was also the exact time when I
  started to use eMusic to download indie label MP3s. Post Rock was a good
  choice of genre for this service since most of the artists were on indie
  labels and the abundance of long tracks made the pay per download model a
  great value. In addition to buying the popular works in the genre from the
  2000s, I dug back into the 90s originals like **Mogwai**, **Bark Psychosis**,
  and **Slint**. This would lead me to my favorite album of all time:
  *Spiderland*.  

- **Elephant 6** - Another thing I was very interested in around 2006 was this
  Athens GA based collective. They were also a great target for eMusic purchase
  and I was able to get roughly half the important releases that way. The others
  were hunted down as cheap used CD purchases on Amazon. This exploration was
  highly coupled with my interest in the E6 related bands that were still very
  active in the 2000s like **Of Montreal** and **The Apples In Stereo**. I had
  the opportunity to see two E6 related shows in the last year of the decade: a
  performance by **Circulatory System** at SUNY Geneseo and the entire cast of
  principles playing an ensemble holiday show at Soundlab in Buffalo.

- **Red House Painters** - In the early years of the decade I would use the
  AllMusicGuide to do genre studies and download the top tracks using the "MP3
  services of the era". Later, my eMusic subscription gave me a legit way to
  check out the whole albums in the middle years of the decade. That is how it
  was with Mark Kozelek's first project **Red House Painters**. The
  AllMusicGuide pointed me to slowcore, and I found a scattershot collection of
  tunes on the sharing services of the day, but never really did a deep dive on
  the records until around 2006. This would yield three of my favorite albums of
  all time.

- **Frank Zappa/Jazz Fusion** - Weirdly, the last major artist of the past that
  eMusic connected me to was Frank Zappa. I had been hearing his stuff on Sirius
  The Vault for some time, and multiple friends had tried to get me into him
  over the years. Emusic has a single compilation called *Strictly Commercial*
  which gave me a taste of his career. It focused mostly on the jokey pop songs,
  which have never really been my thing, but there were a few things I really
  liked. I especially enjoyed the jazzy stuff like "Peaches En Regalia". This
  would kick off both a study of **Zappa** and jazz fusion artists like:
  **Return to Forever**, **The Mahavishnu Orchestra** and **Weather Report**.
  The XM radio channel "Beyond Jazz" would then connect me with more classic
  jazz fusion and the contemporary fusion artists of the early to mid 2000s.

- **Goth/Dark Punk & New Wave/Wire** - If there was a single theme that ran
  through the decade for me, it was 80s goth and the various goth adjacent forms
  of music. **Joy Division** was a name I kept hearing as I explored the music
  of the past. I think it was when someone accused one of my recent favorites
  **Interpol** from copying them (not true by the way) that I finally looked
  into *Unknown Pleasures*. Around the same time (c. 2002) I was getting very
  into the early **Cure**. Then led by their quieter more ambient project
  **Delerium** I started to listen to industrial electro-goth favorites **Front
  Line Assembly**. There was one band in particular from the 80s goth scene that
  would pull me into the genre. Around 2003 they released one of my favorite 80s
  shows, "Miami Vice" on DVD. There is an episode that features a mostly
  instrumental version of the **Damned** song "In Dulce Decorum" which reminded
  me of how much I loved that song on the *Miami Vice II Soundtrack* Album. I
  downloaded the original version from iTunes, and it was a great point of entry
  to the world of 80s goth. I would gradually build a collection of all the
  **Damned** records and other leading acts in the genre like **Bauhaus**,
  **Christian Death**, and **Echo and the Bunnymen**. My earlier interest in
  **Joy Division** would lead me to the 4AD label a different kind of dark music
  that was more subdued and melodic with bands like **Cocteau Twins**, **This
  Mortal Coil**, and especially the fantastic **Dead Can Dance**. Around 2007, I
  bought the Rhino collection **A Life Less Lived: The Gothic Box** and I became
  fully immersed in the genre. Shortly after, when I started to collect vinyl
  records, goth would be a cornerstone of my collection, and I would buy the
  most famous records by acts like **Sisters of Mercy**, **The Mission**, and
  **The Cult** on reputation alone. Towards the end of the decade I would
  explore the much celebrated, first three records of the band **Wire**. While
  all three are based in dark minimalist punk and new wave, their third, *154*
  might be the finest goth record ever made.

**Other Important Threads**

There were other ways that I was hearing music in the 2000s and there was music
outside of the range that I feel like I can include in the main list here for
some reason.

- **Party Hip Hop / Rap** - In the year 2000, I moved to State College PA to
  attend Penn State Main Campus. Like most students, I went to parties. The
  party music of the day was the latest hip-hop and rap hits. I especially
  remember hearing "Party Up" by **DMX**, "Big Pimpin'" by **Jay-Z**, and
  "Still D.R.E." by **Dr. Dre**. As someone who was raised in a fairly
  conservative religious movement in white middle America, I was getting exposed
  to a whole new scene through these parties and the music that was featured. It
  led me to tune into MTV for the first time in half a decade where I found out
  about artists like **Ludicris**  ("Rollout"), **Missy Elliot** ("Gossip
  Folks"), and **Outkast** (many songs, but initially **Mrs. Jackson**, and
  **Killer Mike** ("A.D.I.D.A.S."). I did stay in contact with this music,
  mostly at parties, in my student days, but generally speaking it hasn't
  followed me into adult life. I do have a playlist I put on every now and then
  when I want to feel young.

- **Classical Music** - Around the turn of the millennium, my favorite store to
  hang out in was Borders Books, Movies and Music. There was a location very
  close to the Penn State satellite campus I was attending, and I spent a lot of
  time there, particularly in the music section. That location was almost always
  playing what I now know to be baroque music, particularly **J.S. Bach**.
  The staff were happy to direct me to a 2 disc compilation of his work that
  would become the first entry into my classical music collection. Shortly after
  I found a discount box set collection of classical piano favorites at best buy
  on deep discount. The recordings are awful, and I would never listen to this
  box now, but it led me to several pieces that would become lifetime favorites
  particularly "Piano Concerto No. 2" by **Sergei Rachmaninoff**. My friends who
  were in music school at the time tried to talk me out of it because
  **Rachmaninoff** will never be cool, but I didn't care then and I don't care
  now. Around 2001 I heard a MIDI file play in a 3D virtual space in the larval
  metaverse app called "Active Worlds". It was a striking piece of music that I
  discovered to be the slow movement from **Beethoven**'s "Second Symphony".
  That remarkable discovery led to buy a large, expensive box set of all nine of
  his symphonies. At this point I was hooked. On my first trip to London in
  early 2007 I was able to see a live orchestra for the first time. I went to a
  concert in their main series that featured the works of **Janacek** and
  **Brahms**. I would discover two of my favorites at this concert. **Leos
  Janacek** is my favorite composer, and the piece I heard that evening "Taras
  Bulba" is one of my absolute favorites. This would be the first time I heard
  **Brahms** "Violin Concerto", but I liked it so much I would attend a concert
  less than a year later to hear the Colorado symphony perform it as well.
  Around this same time I saw the movie "2001: A Space Odyssey" for the first
  time as an adult. It was a frequent part of the HDNet Movies programming, and
  it was a striking film to see and hear in the new higher resolution. I
  particularly connected with the music of **Gyorgy Ligeti** which would be my
  entry into the very modern sounds of the mid-20th century. I arrived in
  Rochester, NY a big fan of classical music, and ready to consume all that town
  and its conservatory had to offer.

- **Game Music** - The late 90s, and early 2000s was the dawn of the "video
  games as art" movement. One area where innovation and sophistication was being
  felt strongly was the music in the games. The first game where I really
  noticed the music was *Final Fantasy VIII*. In many ways this game is mostly
  remembered for its score by **Nobuo Uematsu** today. I was so struck by it,
  the first thing I ever bought off of ebay back in 2001 was a black market Hong
  Kong produced four CD set of the score. The scores would become more symphonic
  in the PS2 era and the melodramatic, anime style music for *Final Fantasy X*
  (again by **Uematsu**) and *Xenosaga* (by **Yasunori Mitsuda**) were high
  points. In many ways the track "Zanarkand" from *FFX* is the high point for
  the genre of game music in general. By the end of the decade orchestral tours
  would travel internationally to play this material in front of packed houses.
  Simultaneously to this, there was a growing appreciation for the music of the
  16-bit era of the early to mid 90s. While the tools artists had available to
  them was limited there was a lot to like about the core melodies and themes of
  these now ancient scores. Remix sites were created (most noteworthy "OCRemix"
  still exists today) where the music of that era were expanded upon and
  developed in a variety of styles. It was there that the raw scores from
  classics like *F-Zero*, *Megaman X*, and *Castlevania* reached their full
  potential. Of particular note for me is the classic "Filmore" theme ("Filmoa"
  in the Japanese version), and the fact that remixes are still being made of
  this funky track show how much good there is in the 16-bit original. The
  ultimate statement from this time is probably still *Final Fantasy VI* and the
  key tracks from that score, including the opera (?) that somehow was pulled
  off convincingly on SNES hardware are still impressive today. The 90s and
  2000s were the golden age of game music, and I was a big fan in my early 20s.