2001
----

From here on out, since I am working backwards through time on this project, my
favorite albums will be highly decoupled from the music I was listening to
at the time. I guess I'll have to consider each separately and note the limited
overlap when it happens.

What we have below is a combination of 90s alternative holdovers, a few early
2000s indie classics, some atmospheric instrumental music, and an anime film
soundtrack. I don't know that I could have intentionally captured the spirit of
the time better if I had designed a set of records to intentionally do so. This
is often thought of as "the year the indie broke" and that is very much true. It
is also very true that there were bands on both sides of the Atlantic that that
were already very active and influential that would later get lumped into the indie
scene as it progressed. While this was the year that the post-punk revival
started, the roots for many of the threads that would make up the indie sound of
the new millennium were already in place.

It is remarkable to think about how different music consumption was in the
physical media era. This was the year that my music collection overflowed what I
called "the first 400". In the CD era there were a number of changer/cartridge
based methods that provided access to more than a single album at once, and I
invested in two huge, 200 CD carousel changers stacked up in my home hifi to
provide me the ability to cycle though the entirety of my collection. Thanks to
the salary afforded by my internship, and the bulk pricing of the BMG and
Columbia House Music Clubs, it didn't take long for me to outgrow the limits of
this setup. It was also becoming increasingly inconvenient to shuttle discs back
and forth to my State College apartment. When I returned home for a visit, on
the evening I drove back to school I would pick out a new set of discs to bring
back with me. I had a database of my collection and their positions in my CD
changers that I would print out and use to pull discs and transfer to one of two
huge leather bound CD wallets for transport.

The database I used to orchestrate CD pulls would go on to become a
chronological account of the albums I acquired between the years of 2001 and the
end of the CD era (c. 2011). I still have a version of this today as a Google
Docs spreadsheet, and it was an invaluable resource in compiling the lists for
this project. The "First 400" was not logged chronologically, but instead was
sorted alphabetically into two bins of "classic rock" and "contemporary music".
It serves as a time capsule of the music of my youth. It also frustrated me that
in the streaming era that I didn't have the same kind of accounting of the music
I was listening to. This was a primary inspiration for what I am doing here.

In 2001, I also bought by first MP3 player. A Nike branded product made by
Diamond Media (remember those guys?) targeted at runners. I always dreamed of
having my music collection with me on my runs, and this device finally made that
a reality. I remember standing in Best Buy deciding between the Play 60 and the
more expensive Play 120. I splurged on the higher capacity unit, because the 64
MB on offer (over 32 MB) would give me a chance of fitting a single album at the
then standard 128 mbps encoding rate. Up to this point, MP3s were a way to
sample music. This would be my gateway to encoding my physical collection as
MP3s, and a migration to digital media as a primary means of consumption.

.. image:: images/consumption_2001.png
  :width: 900
  :alt: a pivot point for how I was listening

None of the records below were ever transferred via USB 1.0 proprietary
connector into the 64 GB of flash memory on that Nike branded device. Nor do any
have the honor of being in the "First 400" that lived inside those giant jukebox
changers.

.. image:: images/2001.jpg
  :width: 900
  :alt: My 2001 favorite albums

.. raw:: html

  <iframe style="border-radius:12px"
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/6RCyIPEBZNxfxPRvz1vxin?utm_source=generator&theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="380" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; 
  clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"
  loading="lazy"></iframe>
  
- *10,000 Hz Legend* by **Air** - A fairly big change-up from what had come
  before. There is some of the chill lounge electronica we had come to know, but
  there now are vocals and more upbeat tracks. A very fuzzy and psychedelic
  sound that is an all around more difficult, but rewarding listen. [*Memory*:
  After I warmed up to their first record, I sought out downloads of the key
  singles off of this the latest record (using the services of the day). It made
  me curious to buy the full record from Columbia House, but I didn't like it at
  first. These guys were an acquired taste for me apparently.]

- *Circulatory System* by **Circulatory System** - It is a return back to
  the brighter, poppier sound of the first **Olivia Tremor Control** record. Not
  quite as consistent as the albums from that project, but still a solid bit of
  highly layered psychedelic low-fi. [*Memory*: My vinyl copy was bought after
  the successful Kickstarter campaign in 2019. What a time to collect obscure
  music.]

- *Streethawk: A Seduction* by **Destroyer** - Probably my favorite of the **New
  Pornographers** side-project albums. He makes good use of his pop-folk skills
  without giving into the schmaltzy cheese that would typify his later works. A
  fine indie-pop record. [*Memory*: I discovered this during the eMusic era (c.
  2006) when I would download a mess of records every month on review/reputation
  alone. In this case I at least knew I liked his main band.]

- *Regeneration* by **The Divine Comedy** - A total outlier, and perhaps the
  weakest in his catalog. The best song here, "Perfect Lovesong" follows the
  standard conventions of the artist, but the rest are dominated by the
  participation of **Radiohead**'s producer. It is still an enjoyable record,
  but somewhat second tier. [*Memory*: Due to the reputation this was the last
  of his records I engaged with. In fact, I only really gave it a shot when the
  reissue series was released in 2020.]

- *The Earth is Not a Cold Dead Place* by **Explosions in the Sky** - This
  debut is remembered as much for being release on September 11, 2001 as it was
  for its content. Like the other new records released that Tuesday, it wasn't
  really paid much attention at first. Like everyone I came back to it after the
  huge success of its follow-up and the "Friday Night Lights" soundtrack. This
  is a moodier, heavier affair that is at least as good as the far more famous
  and celebrated work that came next. [*Memory*: These guys have a very
  consistent sound, and two records is all I need of this. I event get those two
  records mixed up. I put the wrong one in the picture above and had to
  photoshop it. Can you tell?]

- *Epitaph* by **Front Line Assembly** - By the beginning of the 21st century
  these guys were now making straight up dance music. It was industrial goth
  dance music, but definitely made for the club. The ambient world music sounds
  of their side project **Delerium** were also starting to leak into their
  primary act. This has their absolute finest track in "Decoy" which almost
  feels like a summary of every great thing they had done to this point.
  [*Memory*: One of the first things I ever bought online was my CD copy of this
  that I got from Overstock.com for about 4 bucks.]

- *La Revancha Del Tango* by **Gotan Project** - A really cool modernization of
  Tango music that adds samples and electronics. A very French kind of music
  that has supplied countless gynmasts with their floor exercise music.
  [*Memory*: This was given to me on a CD-R by a friend in 2002. I've enjoyed it
  for the last 20 years, but I had to lookup who the band even was to write this
  entry. ]

- *Spirited Away Soundtrack* by **Joe Hisaishi** - A remarkable score for a
  remarkable film. The piano based introduction to the film "One Summer Day"
  does an amazing job setting the stage for this mysterious, imaginative fantasy
  film. The eerie soundtrack to the famous train journey, "The Sixth Station" is
  the definitive statement by the composer. The timeless art of Miyazaki and
  Hisaishi are forever linked. [*Memory*: I didn't see any of the Miyazaki films
  until I was 40 years old. I felt like I missed out on so much never having
  seem the movies or heard this wonderful music as a young person.]

- *The Things We Lost in the Fire* by **Low** - A somber record filled with
  gorgeous vocal harmonies. The depressing title sets the mood well for this
  highly affecting record. [*Memory*: I came in contact with these guys while
  doing a genre study of "slowcore" around 2006. While the genre mood fits in
  with that scene, the soaring vocal harmonies go somewhere else entirely.]

- *The Glow, Pt. 2* by **The Microphones** - A record that manages to be quiet
  in a very menacing way, with intermittent bursts of loud noise. "I am Bored"
  is one of my very favorite songs. [*Memory*: One of those albums that was
  highly ranked on RateYourMusic, that I could finally try out once I had eMusic
  buffet pricing.]

- *Rock Action* by **Mogwai** - My favorite record by these guys is their most
  stylistically diverse. We have a lot of the guitar heavy crescendo rock they
  pay the bills with. We also have a stunning Welsh ballad "O I Sleep" and the
  orchestrated ambience of "Take Me Somewhere Nice". [*Memory*: One of the first
  things I did when I got eMusic, was sample a bunch of the most famous
  post-rock albums. This was the first one I connected with.]

- *Origin of Symmetry* by **Muse** [**2001 Favorite**] - Their second record is
  still their finest. The perfect mix of guitars and synths, and soaring
  falsetto vocals. So completely over the top, it manages to somehow avoid
  sounding ridiculous. Delightfully heavy music. [*Memory*: After connecting
  with their third record I sought out the much hyped album that had come
  before, but discovered that it was never released here. For a couple years I
  looked at import listings for the record online, but didn't get my own copy
  until the proper WB release in 2005.]

- *Coquelicot Asleep in the Poppies...* by **Of Montreal** - The last of the
  early lowfi psych records before this bedroom project became a full band.
  Loosely a concept record, but the real focus here is the quirky pop songs and
  layers upon layers of sound. Also the last record with the childlike whimsey
  before Kevin Barnes went in a much more adult territory. [*Memory*: This is
  one of the very first vinyl reissues I remember being very excited about, when
  it was released by Polyvinyl in early 2009.]

- *Amnesiac* by **Radiohead** - One of my strongly held, unpopular opinions is
  that this is far better than the much loved *Kid A*. While the prior record at
  times became lost in meandering instrumentals, this one finds the perfect mix
  of songs and ambient interludes. Several of their greatest songs are here,
  particularly "Pyramid Song", "You And Whose Army?", and especially "Knives
  Out". This might be my favorite of their records. [*Memory*: I listened to
  this on repeat while I assembled my first self-built PC in the fall of 2006.]

- *Melody A.M.* by **Royksopp** - Somewhere between chill and dance electronic,
  these guys found a new sound. They would never make another record quite like
  their debut again, and this is probably still their finest statement.
  [*Memory*: I became aware of them when I bought a discount chill music box set
  at Best Buy that included the track "Eple".]

- *Chutes Too Narrow* by **The Shins** - Almost an indie cliche at this point,
  it is easy to forget what a wonderful collection of pop songs this is. By the
  next album all the rough edges would be gone. The two songs that this ends
  with "Pressed in a Book" and "The Past and Pending" is probably still the best
  moment from this guy. [*Memory*: I'm proud that I knew about this record
  before that dreadful Natalie Portman movie, if only just before. I still came
  on board via "New Slang" when I heard it on Sirius satellite radio in 2003.]

- *Smolik* by **Smolik** - A semi-obscure Polish indie record that is equally
  influenced by folk and electronic music. This is the work of a veteran
  musician who had been around for a while when all of a sudden his music was
  very in fashion. I love the minimal wave intro, and picture the artist making
  the track behind the iron curtain in the late 80s. [*Memory*: A friend of mine
  came home from Poland with this disk, very excited about the burgeoning indie
  scene in his home nation. I think this album ended up resonating even more
  with me. I've listened to the CD-R copy I burned many times in the 20 years
  since.]
  
- *Girls Can Tell* by **Spoon** - The album where they got their magic
  formula together. Percussive, minimalist indie rock that is more
  piano/keyboard focussed. A fantastic record, and the next three albums were a
  progressive climb from here. [*Memory*: "The Fitted Shirt" was a really
  amusing in retrospect because of the role hipsters would play in bringing back
  slim cut men's fashion.]

- *Is this It* by **The Strokes** - The *Pet Sounds* of the 2000s indie scene.
  These guys were always poppier than their post-punk revival contemporaries,
  but in retrospect this feels like a very bubblegum high-water mark for the
  genre. Feels less overrated now than it did back then, classic stuff.
  [*Memory*: Like many folks, this music got on my radar at the 2002 VMAs when
  all of a sudden there was a new kind of rock music with the likes of **The
  Vines**, **The Hives**, and **The White Stripes**, but these guys are the only
  band from that cohort who are still active and relevant.]

- *Rings Around the World* by **Super Furry Animals** - For exactly one album
  they gathered up and made a fore measured, mature record. It still has the
  best elements of their classic neo-psychedelia, but now with strings and
  highly refined production values. I would have loved more work in this vein.
  [*Memory*: I always liked this record, but I didn't really connect with it
  until the days of the 2020 pandemic. I guess I needed to be a bit older to
  fully understand this kind of music.]

- *Leaves Turn Inside You* by **Unwound** - The kind of slow, atmospheric rock
  that gets lumped into the post-rock scene, even if that isn't quite right.  I
  have never totally been able to get into these guys, but this one is a
  classic. [*Memory*: I discovered this in the late 2010s when I heard a DJ play
  it on one of the local college radio stations late at night. That is exactly
  the kind of record this is.]