2010s
=====
This was an interesting decade for music and for my relationship with music.
When it began, we were at the point I like to call "peak indie" where a
collection of small labels were releasing the most culturally relevant albums,
and the big labels were trying to pretend they were the small labels in order to
compete. I was writing for a local music blog, and attending multiple large music
festivals per year. These were mostly the (now rare) club festivals that were
spread out among multiple small venues over several days. These were the kind of
festivals that demanded research and study to attend properly. I loved the
process of reading about all the bands, getting ahold of a sample of music, and
laying out my plan to rove about the clubs to catch my favorites. The tee-shirts
and vinyl records bought from merch stands at these shows are now staples of my
wardrobe and album collection today.

When the decade closed, mainstream pop from the major labels had returned as the
dominant force in the music scene. It had never really went away, it was more
that independent music receded to the shadows again. I have nothing against
mainstream pop, as my lists for earlier decades show. My objections mostly have
to do with the impacts of how modern pop music is made. Today, your average pop
single is written and produced by a committee of dozens. When that many folks
contribute to the creative process it has the effect of sanding every edge off of the track by the time
it reaches the finish line. Any remaining distinguishing characteristic was so
intentionally created, it can't help but feel contrived. I haven't been to a
music festival since 2013. That last one was the inaugural "Crossing Brooklyn
Ferry", a combination of the most high brow indie combined with artists that
typically get labeled as contemporary classical. The rest of the decade, 75% of
the live music I saw was the local symphony orchestra, This was where "I got
old", but where exactly did it happen?

2019
----
This year holds the distinction of me having the fewest favorite albums despite
being alive to experience the music first hand. There is no question I was
almost completely disengaged from looking for new music. I spent a lot of time
listening to the local classical music station, and some time looking backward
thinking about the project I am working on here.

.. image:: images/2019.jpg
  :width: 800
  :alt: My favorite albums from 2019

.. raw:: html

  <iframe
  src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/3J3ZDe6pnhcNWbCEHKsY1m?theme=0" 
  width="100%" height="80" frameBorder="0" allowtransparency="true" 
  allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

- *Norman Fucking Rockwell* by **Lana Del Rey** - This was the only album that I
  discovered and fully engaged with during the year of 2019. I like all of
  Lana's albums, but this one is stunning. The songwriting has gone to a new
  level, and she has really separated herself from her peers working in the the
  crowded female singer songwriter (with a large support team) space of our
  current era. "Venice Bitch" and "Hope is a Dangerous Thing for A Woman Like Me
  to Have, but I Have it" are her two finest songs so far.

- *Office Politics* by **The Divine Comedy** - No act played a bigger part in my
  late 2010s listening that Neil Hannon and company. I had largely stayed away
  from the newer records, as I was for some reason convinced that their best work
  was back in the 90s. I especially avoided this record due to that horrendous
  cover making it look like some sort of comedy record. Hannon has always gone
  right up to the line of being a "joke band" but has managed to stay in the
  region of witty, ornate chamber pop. This record was a pretty big departure
  musically, with a broad range of styles, and has the most humor we have seen
  from him in over 20 years. I was wrong to be suspicious, this is an exciting
  reinvention and an indication of a bright future.

- *Forever* by **Metronomy** - When I heard this back in 2019 I immediately
  loved the song "Sex Emoji" but didn't really get the rest.  This is one of
  Metronomy's more difficult albums, and it took some time to warm up to the
  more intricate, atmospheric electronic parts.

- *Motion* by **Rone** - Somewhere between electronic music and contemporary
  classical, I love this kind of thing. I have my Spotify weekly recommendations
  to thank for this one. Good job Spotify! This is technically a long single,
  not an album. This is how little music I've heard from 2019, that I need to
  count this.